arXiv:2506.06326v1 [cs.AI] 30 May 2025  Memory OS of AI Agent  Jiazheng Kang  Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications  kjz@bupt.edu.cn  Mingming Ji  Tencent AI Lab  matthhewj@tencent.com  Zhe Zhao  Tencent AI Lab  nlpzhezhao@tencent.com  Ting Bai   *  Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications  baiting@bupt.edu.cn  Abstract  Large Language Models (LLMs) face a cru- cial challenge from fixed context windows and inadequate memory management, leading to a severe shortage of long-term memory capa- bilities and limited personalization in the in- teractive experience with AI agents. To over- come this challenge, we innovatively propose a   Memory O perating   S ystem, i.e.,   Memo- ryOS , to achieve comprehensive and efficient memory management for AI agents. Inspired by the memory management principles in op- erating systems, MemoryOS designs a hierar- chical storage architecture and consists of four key modules: Memory Storage, Updating, Re- trieval, and Generation. Specifically, the archi- tecture comprises three levels of storage units: short-term memory, mid-term memory, and long-term personal memory.   Key operations within MemoryOS include dynamic updates between storage units: short-term to mid-term updates follow a dialogue-chain-based FIFO principle, while mid-term to long-term updates use a segmented page organization strategy. Our pioneering MemoryOS enables hierarchi- cal memory integration and dynamic updat- ing.   Extensive experiments on the LoCoMo benchmark show an average improvement of 49.11% on F1 and 46.18% on BLEU-1 over the baselines on GPT-4o-mini, showing con- textual coherence and personalized memory retention in long conversations.   The imple- mentation code is open-sourced at   https:// github.com/BAI-LAB/MemoryOS .  1   Introduction  Large Language Models (LLMs) demonstrate im- pressive capabilities in text comprehension and generation, but face inherent limitations in sus- taining dialogue coherence due to their reliance on fixed-length contextual windows for memory management. This fixed-length design inherently  * Corresponding author.  struggles to preserve continuity in dialogues with significant temporal gaps, often resulting in dis- jointed memory that manifests as factual incon- sistencies and reduced personalization.   Long- term memory coherence is critical in scenarios re- quiring persistent user adaptation, multi-session knowledge retention, or stable persona representa- tion across extended interactions, where the limi- tations of fixed-length memory management in de- fault LLMs become particularly acute, constitut- ing a significant open challenge in the field. To   address   this   challenge,   current   memory mechanisms in default LLMs can be broadly cat- egorized into three methodological types:   (1)  Knowledge-organization   methods   (Xu   et   al., 2025; Liu et al., 2023), such as A-Mem structure memory into interconnected semantic networks or notes to enable adaptive management and flexible retrieval;   (2)   Retrieval mechanism-oriented   ap- proaches (Huang et al., 2024; Zhong et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024), e.g., MemoryBank integrates se- mantic retrieval with a memory forgetting curve mechanism to allow long-term memory updating; and (3)   Architecture-driven   methods (Packer et al., 2023; Chhikara et al., 2025), such as MemGPT use hierarchical structures with explicit read and write operations to dynamically manage context.   Al- though these diverse strategies typically operate in isolation, i.e., each focusing on single dimensions such as storage structure, retrieval machinism, or update strategies, no unified operating system has been proposed to enable systematic and compre- hensive memory management for AI agents. Inspired by memory management principles in operating systems, we pioneer the proposal of a comprehensive memory operating system, termed  MemoryOS . As illustrated in Fig. 1, MemoryOS comprises four core functional modules:   mem- ory   Storage, Updating, Retrieval, and Genera- tion . Through their coordinated collaboration, the system establishes a unified memory management

framework encompassing hierarchical storage, dy- namic updating, adaptive retrieval, and contextual generation.   Specifically,   Memory Storage   orga- nizes information into short-term, mid-term, and long-term storage units.   Memory Updating   dy- namically refreshes via a segmented paging ar- chitecture based on the dialogue-chain and heat- based mechanisms.   Memory Retrieval   leverages semantic segmentation to query these tiers, then  Response Generation   integrates retrieved mem- ory information to generate coherent and personal- ized responses. This synergistic workflow ensures holistic management of long-term conversational memory, enabling contextual coherence and per- sonalized recall in extended dialogues.   The pri- mary contributions of our work are summarized as: • We make the first innovative attempt to intro- duce a systematic operating system, termed MemoryOS, for memory management, em- powering AI agents with long-term conversa- tional coherence and user persona persistence in long conversational interactions. • MemoryOS introduces a pioneering three- tier hierarchical memory storage architecture and integrates four core functional modules (i.e, storage, updating, retrieval, and genera- tion) for memory management, enabling dy- namic capture and evolution of user prefer- ences across extended dialogues. • Comprehensive experiments validate Memo- ryOS’s effectiveness and efficiency in main- taining response correctness and coherence across diverse benchmark datasets, demon- strating its capability to handle long conver- sational interactions.  2   Related Work  2.1   Memory for LLM Agents  Existing Large Language Models (LLMs) face fundamental challenges in handling complex sce- narios   requiring   long-term   coherence.   These challenges stem from the inherent limitations of fixed-length designs, which struggle to maintain continuity in dialogues with significant temporal gaps, resulting in fragmented memory that man- ifests as factual inconsistencies and diminished personalization.   Advancements in memory sys- tems of LLMs addressing this problem can be broadly grouped into three categories: knowledge- organization, retrieval mechanism-oriented, and architecture-driven   frameworks   (Zhang   et   al., 2024;   Wu   et   al.,   2025;   Du   et   al.,   2025).  Knowledge-organization   methods focus on cap- turing and structuring the intermediate reason- ing states of large language models.   For exam- ple, Think-in-Memory (TiM) (Liu et al., 2023) stores evolving chains-of-thought, enabling con- sistency through continual updates. A-Mem (Xu et al., 2025) organizes knowledge into an in- terconnected note network that spans sessions. Grounded Memory (Ocker et al., 2025) integrates vision-language models for perception,   knowl- edge graphs for structured memory representation to enable context-aware reasoning in smart per- sonal assistants.   Retrieval mechanism–oriented  approaches enrich the model with an external memory library.   MemoryBank (Zhong et al., 2024) logs conversations, events, and user traits in a vector database and refreshes them using a forgetting-curve schedule; AI-town (Park et al., 2023) keeps memories in natural language and adds a reflection loop for relevance filtering. Emo- tionalRAG (Huang et al., 2024) retrieves mem- ory entries by combining semantic similarity with the agent’s current emotional state using a hy- brid   strategy.   Architecture-driven   designs   al- ter the core control flow to manage context ex- plicitly.   For example, MemGPT (Packer et al., 2023) adopts an OS-like hierarchy with dedicated  read / write   calls, while Self-Controlled Memory (SCM) (Wang et al., 2025) introduces dual buffers and a memory controller that gates selective recall.  2.2   Memory Management in OS  Modern operating systems (OS) use combined segment-page memory management to balance logical structure with efficient physical utiliza- tion. Classic approaches like Multics   (Bensous- san et al., 1972) organize memory into segments divided into pages, supporting efficient manage- ment, protection, and sharing.   Segment meta- data (size, access permissions) prevents external fragmentation   (Bensoussan et al., 1972), while paging reduces internal fragmentation   (Denning, 1970). Advanced OS use priority-based eviction (e.g., LRU, working-set models) to maintain hot data   (Denning, 1970), and Zheng et al.   (Zheng et al., 2020) show that combining coarse-grained segmentation with fine-grained paging minimizes overhead on many-core processors.

Query  STM  FIFO  Insert to MTM  Heat  Update to LPM  Page  Heat  Dialogue  Chain  Retrieve   Retrieve   Retrieve  FIFO   Relevant LPM  Response Generation  answer  Timestamp  Query  Push to STM  Segment  LPM  User  Profile  Agent  Profile  Agent  Traits  User Traits  User KB  Static  Dynamic  User Persona   Agent Persona  MTM  Top-m Segment  τ  Top-k Page  Delete Segment Figure 1: The overview architecture of MemoryOS, including memory Store, Updating, Retrieval, Response.  Inspired by the management in OS, our Mem- oryOS applies these principles by structuring its memory into logical segments (conversation top- ics) subdivided into pages. It uses heat-based pri- oritization to retain relevant content and efficiently discard or archive less-accessed information, en- hancing context management and personalization.  3   MemoryOS  MemoryOS is a comprehensive memory manage- ment system for AI agents that dynamically up- dates memory and retrieves semantically relevant context, ensuring coherent and personalized inter- actions in long conversations.  3.1   Overview Architecture  The overview architecture of MemoryOS is illus- trated in Fig. 1. It consists of four modules: mem- ory storage, update, retrieval, and generation.  Memory Storage:   This module is responsible for organizing and storing memory information by a three-tier hierarchical structure: Short-Term Memory (STM) for timely conversations, Mid- Term Memory (MTM) for recurring topic sum- maries, and Long-term Personal Memory (LPM) for user or agent preferences, ensuring memory in- tegrity and effective utilization.  Memory Updating:   This module manages dy- namic   memory   refreshing,   including   STM-to- MTM   updates   via   dialogue-chain   FIFO   and MTM-to-LPM updates using a segmented page strategy with heat-based replacement.  Memory Retrieval:   This module retrieves rel- evant memory via specific queries, employing a two-tiered approach in MTM: semantic relevance identifies segments first, followed by retrieving pertinent dialogue pages. Finally, it combines per- sona attributes from LPM and contextual informa- tion from STM to generate responses, integrating all relevant memories for response generation.  Response Generation:   It processes the data and generates appropriate responses. It integrates re- trieval outcomes from STM, MTM, and LPM into a coherent prompt, enabling the generation of con- textually coherent and personalized responses.  3.2   Memory Storage Module  Memory storage module is implemented via a hi- erarchical structure consisting of three type store units, i.e., Short-Term Memory (STM), Mid-Term Memory (MTM), and Long-term Personal Mem- ory (LPM) store units.  Short-Term Memory (STM):   It stores real- time conversation data in units called   dialogue pages .   Each dialogue page contains the user’s query   Q , the model’s response   R , and the times- tamp   T   , structured as   page i   =   { Q i , R i , T i } . To ensure contextual coherence, a dialogue chain is

constructed for each page to maintain contextual information in short-term continuous dialogue ex- changes and ensure consistent context tracking. A  dialogue page   is defined as:  page chain i   =   { Q i , R i , T i , meta chain i   } ,   (1) where the meta information is generated by an LLM in two steps: first, evaluating a new page’s contextual relevance to prior pages to determine chain linkage or resetting to the current page if semantically discontinuous; second, summarizing all chain pages into   meta chain i   .  Mid-Term Memory (MTM):   Inspired by the memory management principles in Operating Sys- tems, it adopts a   Segmented Paging   storage archi- tecture.   Dialogue pages with the same topic are grouped into segments, each containing multiple pages for a unique topic. The   segment   in MTM is defined as:  segment i   =   { page i   | F score ( page i , segment i )   > θ } ,  (2)  where the content of a segment is summarized by a LLM based on the related dialogue pages.   F score  measures the similarity between the dialogue page and the segment based on both semantic and key- word similarities, defined as:  F score   = cos( e s ,   e p ) +   F Jacard ( K s , K p ) ,   (3) where   e s   and   e p   denote the embedding vectors of a segment and the dialogue page,   K s   and   K p   are the keyword sets summarized by LLMs in the seg- ment and page, respectively.   F Jacard   is the Jacard similarity, defined as   F Jacard   =   | K s ∩ K p | | K s ∪ K p |   . Pages with similarity scores to a segment ex- ceeding the threshold   θ   are merged into the same segment, ensuring topic coherence and semantic consistency within the segment.  Long-term   Persona   Memory   (LPM):   This module ensures that both the user and the assis- tant maintain a persistent memory of important personal details and characteristics, ensuring con- sistency and personalization over long-term inter- actions. It consists of two components: the User Persona and the AI Agent Persona. •   User Persona . The   User Profile   comprises a static component with fixed attributes (gen- der, name, birth year), a User Knowledge Base ( User KB ) that dynamically stores fac- tual information extracted and incrementally updated from past interactions,   and   User Traits   that contains the evolving interests, habits, and preferences of users over time. •   Agent Persona . It contains the   Agent Pro- file , which includes fixed settings like the role the AI agent assistant plays or its character traits, providing a consistent self-description. The   Agent Traits   are dynamic attributes that develop through interactions with the user, potentially including new settings added by the user or interaction history, e.g., recom- mended items, during conversations.  3.3   Memory Update Module  Key updating operations include updates within each unit itself and the update mechanism from STM to MTM, MTM to LPM store units.  STM-MTM Update:   STM stores information in the form of dialogue pages in a queue with fixed length. We employ a First-In-First-Out (FIFO) up- date strategy for information migration to the Mid- Term Memory (MTM). New dialogue page is ap- pended to the queue’s end. When the STM queue reaches its maximum capacity, the oldest dialogue page is transferred from the STM to the MTM ac- cording to the FIFO principle.  MTM-LPM   Update:   MTM   updates   involve two   operations,   i.e.,   segment   deletion   and segment-to-LPM updates, both based on the Heat score of segments, defined as:  Heat   =   α · N visit   + β   · L interaction   + γ   · R recency ,   (4) where coefficients   α ,   β , and   γ   determine the rela- tive importance of each factor.   N visit   is the number of times the segment has been retrieved,   L interaction  denotes the total number of dialogue pages within the segment, and   R recency   is the time decay co- efficient represents the duration since the last re- trieval time of the current segment, defined as:  R recency   =   exp    −   ∆ t μ    , where   ∆ t   is the time elapsed since the last access, measured in seconds, and   μ   is a configurable time constant (i.e., 1e+7). These three metrics, i.e., retrieval count ( N visit ), total dialogue pages ( L interaction ), and time de- cay coefficient ( R recency ), collectively represent the frequent access, high engagement, and recent use as core indicators of segment heat.   When the length of segments exceeds the maximum ca- pacity, segments with the lowest heat are evicted.

This mechanism ensures that the content stored in MTM can retain topics with high engagement fre- quency in long user conversations, preserving de- tailed dialogue content under these topics through a segmented paging structure.  LPM Update:   Segments with heat exceeding a threshold   τ   (i.e., 5) are transferred to LPM. Seg- ments and their dialogue pages update User Traits, User KB, and Agent Traits.   Following the user traits in (Li et al., 2025), we construct personalized User Traits with 90 dimensions across three cate- gories: basic needs and personality, AI alignment dimensions, and content platform interest tags. Then, extract and update these dimensions from segments and dialogue pages to autonomously evolve traits by LLMs.   Meanwhile, factual in- formation relevant to the user and agent assistant is extracted and recorded into the User KB and Agent Traits, respectively. Both the User KB and Assistant Traits maintain a fixed-size queue (i.e., 100), employing a First-In-First-Out (FIFO) strat- egy. After memory transition, the number of pages  L interaction   in Eq. 4 is reset to zero, causing the heat score of the segment to decline. This ensures continuous persona evolution without redundancy.  3.4   Memory Retrieval Module  The Memory Retrieval Module retrieves informa- tion from three parts:   STM for recent context, MTM using a two-stage retrieval (segment and page level), and LPM for personalized knowledge. Given a query from the user, the memory retrieval module retrieves from the stored memory, i.e., STM, MTM, and LPM, to return the most relevant information to generate the responses, defined as:  F Retrieval ( ST M, M T M, LP M   | Q ) ,   (5) where   F Retrieval   is the retrieval strategies applied in three memory store units.  STM retrieval:   All dialogue pages are retrieved as STM holds the most recent contextual memory for the current conversation.  MTM   retrieval:   Inspired   by   psychological memory recall mechanisms (Yuan et al., 2024), a two-stage retrieval process is employed: first se- lecting segments via a matching score (defined in Eq. 3) to select top-m candidate segments, then selecting the top-k most relevant dialogue pages within these segments based on semantic similar- ity.   After retrieval, the segment’s visit counter  N visit   and recency factor   R recency   are updated.  LPM retrieval:   The User KB and Assistant Traits each retrieve the top-10 entries with the highest semantic relevance to the query vector as background knowledge.   All information in the User Profile, Agent Profile, and User Traits is uti- lized, as they store user preference information, agent characteristic information, and user-specific trait information.  3.5   Response Generation Module  Given the user query, the final prompt is con- structed by integrating the above three types of re- trieved content from STM, MTM and LPM, along with the user’s query, form the final prompt in- put for the LLM to generate the final response. The incorporation of memory from recent dia- logue (STM), relevant conversation pages (MTM), and persona information (LPM) ensures responses remain contextually coherent with current interac- tions, draw on historical dialogue details and sum- maries for depth, and align with user and assis- tant identities, respectively, enabling coherent, ac- curate, and personalized interaction experiences of AI agent systems.  4   Experiments  4.1   Experimental Settings Datasets.   We   conduct   our   experiments   on GVD (Zhong et al., 2024) and LoCoMo bench- mark (Maharana et al., 2024) datasets. The GVD dataset consists of multi-turn dialogues simulated from interactions between 15 virtual users and an assistant over a 10-day period, covering at least two topics per day.   The LoCoMo benchmark is specifically designed for assessing long-term conversational memory capabilities, consisting of ultra-long dialogues averaging 300 turns and about 9K tokens per conversation. Questions are catego- rized into four types: Single-hop, Multi-hop, Tem- poral, and Open-domain, to systematically evalu- ate the memory abilities of LLMs.  Evaluation Metrics.   For the GVD dataset, we use three evaluation metrics:   Memory Retrieval Accuracy (Acc.), Response Correctness (Corr.), and Contextual Coherence (Cohe.). Memory Re- trieval Accuracy is evaluated as a binary indicator (0 or 1), while Correctness and Coherence are as- sessed on a three-point scale (0, 0.5, or 1).   All

evaluations on the GVD dataset are automatically scored by the DeepSeek-R1 (DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025). On the LoCoMo benchmark, standard F1 and BLEU-1 (Papineni et al., 2002) are employed to evaluate the model’s performance.  Compared Methods.   We compare MemoryOS with representative memory methods, including:  TiM   (Think-in-Memory)   (Liu   et   al.,   2023):  This approach mimics human memory by storing reasoning outcomes instead of raw dialogues.   It uses locality-sensitive hashing (LSH) to retrieve relevant context before generating responses and updates memory through post-hoc reflection. TiM manages memory via insertion, forgetting, and merging to reduce redundant reasoning and im- prove consistency.  MemoryBank   (Zhong   et   al.,   2024):   This framework dynamically adjusts memory strength based on the Ebbinghaus Forgetting Curve, pri- oritizing important content over time.   It further builds a user portrait through continuous interac- tion analysis to support personalized responses.  MemGPT (Packer et al., 2023):   This method introduces a dual-tier memory, featuring a main context for fast access and an external context for long-term storage.   This design aims to enable scalable memory extension beyond the fixed con- text window of LLMs.  A-Mem (Agentic Memory) (Xu et al., 2025):   it dynamically generates structured notes and links them to form interconnected knowledge networks, enabling continuous memory evolution and adap- tive management for LLMs.  MemoryOS:   It   is   a   comprehensive   memory management framework.   Through coordinated collaboration with four core functional modules: memory Storage, Updating, Retrieval, and Gen- eration. MemoryOS achieves dialogue coherence and user persona persistence in long interactions.  Implementation Details.   The experiments are conducted   on   hardware   equipped   with   8-H20 GPUs.   The fixed length of the dialogue page queue in STM is 7. The maximum length of seg- ments in MTM is set to 200. The maximum ca- pacity for both the User KB and Agent Traits is set to 100 entries. The predefined   Heat   threshold  τ   , which controls the information from the MTM to the LPM, is set to 5. The values of   α ,   β , and   γ   in  Table 1: Comparison results on the GVD dataset.  Model   Method   Acc.   ↑   Corr.   ↑   Cohe. ↑  GPT-4o-mini TiM   84.5   78.8   90.8 MemoryBank   78.4   73.3   91.2 MemGPT   87.9   83.2   89.6 A-Mem   90.4   86.5   91.4  Ours   93.3   91.2   92.3  Improvement (%)   3.2 %   ↑   5.4 %   ↑   1.0 %   ↑  Qwen2.5-7B TiM   82.2   73.2   85.5 MemoryBank   76.3   70.3   82.7 MemGPT   85.1   80.2   86.9 A-Mem   87.2   79.5   87.8  Ours   91.8   82.3   90.5  Improvement (%)   5.3 %   ↑   3.5 %   ↑   3.1 %   ↑  Eq. 4 are equality set to 1. For memory retrieval, the number of retrieval top- m   segments was set to 5, and the hyperparameter top- k   for retrieved dialogue page was set to 5 and 10 on the GVD and LoCoMo datasets. The similarity value of   θ   in Eq. 2 is 0.6, and the time constant   μ   is 1e+7.  4.2   Main Results  The experimental resutls in GVD and LoCoMo benchmark datasets are shown in Table 1 and Ta- ble 2. We have the following observations: (1) Among all memory methods, MemoryBank performs the worst.   This indicates that simply applying memory decay mechanisms is insuffi- cient for managing conversational memory effec- tively.   TiM outperforms MemoryBank by miti- gating repetitive reasoning by saving “thoughts" rather than raw turns, but its single-stage hash re- trieval cannot preserve cross-topic dependencies. (2) A-Mem and MemGPT demonstrate rela- tively strong performance in long-form dialogue, But both of them lack systematic memory man- agement mechanisms, giving rise to certain issues. For instance, MemGPT extends context via OS- style paging, yet its flat FIFO queue causes topic mixing as dialogue length grows; A-Mem orga- nizes memories into a graph that enriches seman- tics, but the heavy, multi-step link generation in- flates latency and error accumulation. By contrast, our Memory OS fuses a hierarchical STM/MT- M/LPM architecture via segmented paging with heat-based eviction and a persona module, thereby ensuring that topic-aligned content remains acces- sible while maintaining consistency with users’ specific preferences. (3) Our proposed MemoryOS achieves superior performance across all benchmark datasets due to

Table 2: LoCoMo dataset comparison with per-category scores and average ranks. A-Mem refers to the results reported in the original paper. A-Mem* represents our implementation results under the same experimental envi- ronment as our model.  Model   Method   Single Hop   Multi Hop   Temporal   Open Domain   Avg. Rank   ↓   Avg. Rank   ↓  F1   ↑   BLEU-1   ↑   F1   ↑   BLEU-1   ↑   F1   ↑   BLEU-1   ↑   F1   ↑   BLEU-1   ↑   (F1)   (BLEU-1) GPT-4o-mini TiM   16.25   13.12   18.43   17.35   8.35   7.32   23.74   22.05   3.8   4.0 MemoryBank   5.00   4.77   9.68   6.99   5.56   5.94   6.61   5.16   5.0   5.0 MemGPT   26.65   17.72   25.52   19.44   9.15   7.44   41.04   34.34   2.2   2.5 A-Mem   27.02   20.09   45.85   36.67   12.14   12.00   44.65   37.06   –   – A-Mem*   22.61   15.25   33.23   29.11   8.04   7.81   34.13   27.73   3.0   2.5  Ours   35.27   25.22   41.15   30.76   20.02   16.52   48.62   42.99   1.0   1.0  Improvement (%)   32.35% ↑   42.33% ↑   23.83% ↑   5.67% ↑   118.80% ↑   111.52% ↑   18.47% ↑   25.19% ↑   –   – Qwen2.5-3B TiM   4.37   5.01   2.54   3.21   6.20   5.37   6.35   7.34   4.3   3.5 MemoryBank   3.60   3.39   1.72   1.97   6.63   6.58   4.11   3.32   4.8   4.8 MemGPT   5.07   4.31   2.94   2.95   7.04   7.10   7.26   5.52   2.8   3.8 A-Mem   12.57   9.01   27.59   25.07   7.12   7.28   17.23   13.12   –   – A-Mem*   10.31   8.76   16.31   11.07   6.94   7.31   12.34   10.62   2.3   2.0  Ours   23.26   15.39   21.44   14.95   10.18   8.18   26.23   22.39   1.0   1.0  Improvement (%)   125.61 %   ↑   75.68 %   ↑   31.45 %   ↑   35.05 %   ↑   46.69 %   ↑   11.90 %   ↑   112.56 %   ↑   110.83 %   ↑   –   – (a)Ablation results on the GVD dataset with GPT-4o-mini   (b)Ablation results on the LoCoMo dataset with GPT-4o-mini using the F1 score.  Figure 2: The ablation study on the GVD and LoCoMo benchmark datasets. Table 3: Efficiency analysis on LoCoMo benchmark (quantified by LLM call and recalled tokens counts).  Method   Tokens   Avg.Calls   Avg. F1  MemoryBank   432   3.0   6.84 TiM   1,274   2.6   18.01 MemGPT   16,977   4.3   29.13 A-Mem*   2,712   13.0   26.55  Ours   3,874   4.9   36.23  its hierarchical storage design, semantic retrieval capabilities, and persona-driven dynamic updat- ing, which ensure coherent and accurate mem- ory management.   Notably, the model’s advan- tages are particularly pronounced in more chal- lenging memory management tasks. For example, on the LoCoMo benchmark with gpt-4o-mini, it achieves average improvements of 49.11% on F1 score and 46.18% on BLEU-1, while on the easier GVD dataset, in which all methods achieve higher baseline accuracy, our MemoryOS still surpasses the SOTA baseline A-Mem by 3.2% in accuracy, showing robust handling of complex long-context tasks requiring semantic consistency. (4) To evaluate model efficiency, we employed two metrics:   tokens consumed ( in memory re- (a) LoCoMo: Single Hop   (b) LoCoMo: Mutil Hop  (c) LoCoMo: Temporal   (d) LoCoMo: Open Domain  Figure 3: Impact of hyperparameter   k   (retrieved pages in MTM) on LoCoMo benchmark.  trieval) and average LLM calls in each response. As shown in Table 3, our method outperforms the Top-2 baselines (i.e., MemGPT and A-Mem) in both aspects, requiring significantly fewer LLM calls than A-Mem* (4.9 vs.13) and much lower token   consumption   than   MemGPT   (3,874   vs. 16,977).  4.3   Ablation Study  To assess the contribution of each core module in our framework, we perform an ablation study

Conversation History  A few weeks later ...  I went to the wetland park last week, and the scenery there was beautiful.  You saw beautiful   scenery, went for a run, and saw squirrels. Sorry, I don't remember you mentioning the park.  I feel like eating a burger—do you have any recommendations?  The cheeseburger[...], just don’t forget you’re hitting the gym! Teriyaki chicken burger.it's super delicious!  With MemoryOs Without MemoryOs  User: I went to the   wetland park   last week, and the   scenery there was beautiful.   AI: Sounds likeSounds like a relaxing experience!  User :There were many little   squirrels   running in the trees—they were very   cute.   AI :I like squirrels—they signal a healthy environment.  User :I ran two laps in the park and felt great. I’ll keep   working out to get slimmer .   AI : Exercise is good for health. I’ll   keep you motivated ! Figure 4: Case study demonstrating the positive impact of introducing our memory management system. Left: default LLMs; Right: with MemoryOS.  by individually removing three key components: the Mid-Term Memory (-MTM), the Long-term Persona Module (-LPM), and the Diague page Chain (-Chain) and the entire memory system (- MemoryOS). The results are presented in Figure 2. We can see that the memory system plays a piv- otal role in the quality of responses during long dialogues. Without MemoryOS, the model’s per- formance drastically reduces. In MemoryOS, the Mid-Term Memory (MTM) has the most signifi- cant impact, followed by the Long-Term Memory (LPM), while the Chain has the least impact.  4.4   Hyperparameter Analysis  We analyze the impact of top-k retrieved dia- logue pages from Mid-Term Memory (MTM) on model performance. As shown in Fig. 3, by set- ting the hyperparameter   k   with different values  k   =   { 5 ,   10 ,   20 ,   30 ,   40 }   on the LoCoMo bench- mark, we can see that the model’s performance improves as   k   increases, but the improvements di- minish when exceeding a threshold.   Retrieving more pages can enhance model performance, but excessive content may introduce noise, adversely affecting performance. We set   k   = 10   to achieve a relatively favorable performance while minimiz- ing computational overhead.  4.5   Case Study  To visually demonstrate the role of our memory system, specifically how user long-term memory maintenance enhances conversational consistency. We present case studies in Fig. 4.   Based on the conversation history, we show the responses of de- fault LLMs and our LLMs with MemoryOS. We can see that MemoryOS exhibits excellent capa- bilities in recalling users’ long-term conversations and preferences.   For example, MemoryOS re- calls details like "seeing the scenery, running, and spotting squirrels in the wetland park." from the initially mentioned a few weeks ago, “I went to the wetland park ...".   These details are retrieved through the interplay and mutual support of mid- term memory’s segment-page storage and the di- alogue page chain. In addition, since the system integrates a personalization module, it can remem- ber the user’s goal of “wanting to get fit” and later proactively reminds the user when they express a desire to eat a burger: “Don’t forget you want to get slimmer”.   This highlights the crucial role of the memory module in enhancing dialogue coher- ence and user experience.  5   Conclusion  Inspired by memory management mechanisms in operating systems, we pioneers propose a novel memory management system, MemoryOS, for AI agents.   Implemented by a hierarchical mem- ory storage architecture, MemoryOS addresses the fixed context window limitations in long conversa- tions. By adapting OS-style segment-paging stor- age for dialogue history, MemoryOS enables effi- cient memory storage, updating, and semantic re- trieval using heat-driven eviction to dynamically prioritize critical information across memory tiers. The integrated persona module captures evolving user preferences via personalized trait extraction, ensuring responses align with long conversation contexts. By bridging OS principles with AI mem- ory management, MemoryOS empowers LLMs to sustain coherent, personalized conversations over extended interactions, enhancing human-like dia- logue capabilities in real-world applications.

References  André Bensoussan, C. T. Clingen, and R. C. Daley. 1972.   The multics virtual memory: Concepts and design.   Communications of the ACM , 15(5):308– 318. Prateek Chhikara, Dev Khant, Saket Aryan, Taranjeet Singh, and Deshraj Yadav. 2025. Mem0: Building production-ready ai agents with scalable long-term memory.   arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.19413 . DeepSeek-AI, Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Ruoyu Zhang, Runxin Xu, Qihao Zhu, Shirong Ma, Peiyi Wang, Xiao Bi, Xiaokang Zhang, Xingkai Yu, Yu Wu, Z. F. Wu, Zhibin Gou, Zhihong Shao, Zhuoshu Li, Ziyi Gao, and 5 others. 2025.   Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capa- bility in llms via reinforcement learning.   Preprint , arXiv:2501.12948. Peter J. Denning. 1970. Virtual memory.   ACM Com- puting Surveys , 2(3):153–189. Yiming Du, Wenyu Huang, Danna Zheng, Zhaowei Wang, Sebastien Montella, Mirella Lapata, Kam-Fai Wong, and Jeff Z Pan. 2025. Rethinking memory in ai: Taxonomy, operations, topics, and future direc- tions.   arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.00675 . Le Huang, Hengzhi Lan, Zijun Sun, Chuan Shi, and Ting Bai. 2024.   Emotional rag:   Enhancing role- playing agents through emotional retrieval.   In  2024 IEEE International Conference on Knowledge Graph (ICKG) , pages 120–127. Hao Li, Chenghao Yang, An Zhang, Yang Deng, Xiang Wang, and Tat-Seng Chua. 2024. Hello again! llm- powered personalized agent for long-term dialogue.  arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.05925 . Jia-Nan Li, Jian Guan, Songhao Wu, Wei Wu, and Rui Yan. 2025.   From 1,000,000 users to every user: Scaling up personalized preference for user-level alignment.   Preprint , arXiv:2503.15463. Lei Liu, Xiaoyan Yang, Yue Shen, Binbin Hu, Zhiqiang Zhang,   Jinjie   Gu,   and   Guannan   Zhang.   2023. Think-in-memory: Recalling and post-thinking en- able llms with long-term memory.   arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.08719 . Adyasha Maharana, Dong-Ho Lee, Sergey Tulyakov, Mohit Bansal, Francesco Barbieri, and Yuwei Fang. 2024.   Evaluating very long-term conversational memory of LLM agents. In   Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa- tional Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 13851–13870, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics. Felix Ocker,   Jörg Deigmöller,   Pavel Smirnov,   and Julian Eggert. 2025.   A grounded memory sys- tem   for   smart   personal   assistants.   Preprint , arXiv:2505.06328. Charles Packer, Vivian Fang, Shishir_G Patil, Kevin Lin, Sarah Wooders, and Joseph_E Gonzalez. 2023. Memgpt: Towards llms as operating systems. Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei- Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a method for automatic eval- uation of machine translation. In   Proceedings of the 40th annual meeting of the Association for Compu- tational Linguistics , pages 311–318. Joon Sung Park,   Joseph O’Brien,   Carrie Jun Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and Michael S Bernstein. 2023. Generative agents: Interactive sim- ulacra of human behavior.   In   Proceedings of the 36th annual acm symposium on user interface soft- ware and technology , pages 1–22. Bing Wang, Xinnian Liang, Jian Yang, Hui Huang, Shuangzhi Wu, Peihao Wu, Lu Lu, Zejun Ma, and Zhoujun Li. 2025.   Scm:   Enhancing large lan- guage model with self-controlled memory frame- work.   Preprint , arXiv:2304.13343. Yaxiong Wu, Sheng Liang, Chen Zhang, Yichao Wang, Yongyue Zhang, Huifeng Guo, Ruiming Tang, and Yong Liu. 2025. From human memory to ai mem- ory: A survey on memory mechanisms in the era of llms.   arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.15965 . Wujiang Xu, Zujie Liang, Kai Mei, Hang Gao, Jun- tao Tan,   and Yongfeng Zhang. 2025.   A-mem: Agentic memory for llm agents.   arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.12110 . Peiwen Yuan, Xinglin Wang, Shaoxiong Feng, Boyuan Pan, Yiwei Li, Heda Wang, Xupeng Miao, and Kan Li. 2024.   Generative dense retrieval: Memory can be a burden. In   Proceedings of the 18th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Com- putational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , St. Julian’s, Malta. Association for Computational Lin- guistics. Zeyu Zhang, Xiaohe Bo, Chen Ma, Rui Li, Xu Chen, Quanyu Dai, Jieming Zhu, Zhenhua Dong, and Ji- Rong Wen. 2024.   A survey on the memory mech- anism of large language model-based agents.   arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.13501 . Yan Zheng,   Tong Zou,   and Xingyan Wang. 2020. Segment-page-combined   memory   management technology   based   on   a   homegrown   many-core processor.   CCF Transactions on High Performance Computing , 2(4):376–381. Wanjun Zhong, Lianghong Guo, Qiqi Gao, He Ye, and Yanlin Wang. 2024. Memorybank: Enhancing large language models with long-term memory.   In   Pro- ceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intel- ligence , volume 38, pages 19724–19731.