Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 6218–6240 April 29 - May 4, 2025 ©2025 Association for Computational Linguistics EmoCharacter: Evaluating the Emotional Fidelity of Role-Playing Agents in Dialogues  Qiming Feng 1 , Qiujie Xie 1 , Xiaolong Wang 1 , Qingqiu Li 1 , Yuejie Zhang 1* ,   Rui Feng 1* ,   Tao Zhang 2* ,   Shang Gao 3  1 School of Computer Science, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Fudan University,  2 School of Information Management and Engineering, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Financial Information Technology, Shanghai University of Finance and Economics,   3 School of Information Technology, Deakin University  {qmfeng23, qjxie22, xiaolongwang24, qqli22}@m.fudan.edu.cn, {yjzhang, fengrui}@fudan.edu.cn, taozhang@mail.shufe.edu.cn,   shang.gao@deakin.edu.au  Abstract  Role-playing agents (RPAs) powered by large language models (LLMs) have been widely uti- lized in dialogue systems for their capability to deliver personalized interactions. Current evaluations of RPAs mainly focus on person- ality fidelity, tone imitation, and knowledge consistency, while overlooking emotional fi- delity, a key factor that affects user experience. To this end, we propose a benchmark called EmoCharacter to assess emotional fidelity of RPAs in dialogues. EmoCharacter includes two benchmark datasets (single-turn and multi-turn dialogues), three evaluation settings, and six metrics to measure the emotional fidelity be- tween RPAs and the characters they portray. Based on EmoCharacter, we conduct extensive evaluations on RPAs powered by seven widely used LLMs with representative role-playing methods. Our empirical findings reveal that: (1) Contrary to intuition, current role-playing methods often reduce the emotional fidelity of LLMs in dialogues; (2) Enhancing the general capabilities of LLMs does not necessarily im- prove the emotional fidelity of RPAs; (3) Fine- tuning or In-Context Learning based on real dialogue data can enhance emotional fidelity.  1   Introduction  The rise of large language models (LLMs) has rev- olutionized dialogue systems, enabling more dy- namic and personalized interactions (Wang et al., 2023a; Yi et al., 2024).   Among these advance- ments, role-playing agents (RPAs) have emerged, with agents assigned specific characters or personas. RPAs have been successfully deployed in various applications, ranging from entertainment to men- tal health support (Tseng et al., 2024; Park et al., 2023; Gan et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2024). Current evaluations of RPAs primarily focus on personality fidelity, tone imitation, and knowledge consistency (Wang et al., 2024b, 2023b; Shao et al., 2023),  * Corresponding authors.  while overlooking a critical aspect of human-like interaction: emotional fidelity.  Emotional fidelity   refers to the degree to which an RPA can simulate the emotional dynamics of the character it portrays. Human beings naturally display emotional shifts based on the context, tone, and flow of conversation (Chang et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2017). Psychological research indicates that personality is closely linked to emotions, with dif- ferent characters exhibiting varying emotional dy- namics in dialogues (Poria et al., 2018; Kokko- nen and Pulkkinen, 1999). The ability to exhibit emotional variability and coherence throughout a dialogue is essential for achieving realistic and en- gaging role-playing experiences. However, existing RPAs often fail to capture these nuances, offering static emotional responses or inaccurately portraying emotions, thereby break- ing the illusion of authenticity.   To address this gap, we propose EmoCharacter, a novel benchmark designed to assess the emotional fidelity of RPAs. EmoCharacter includes two benchmark datasets de- rived from classic TV dialogues and introduces six metrics across three evaluation settings to quantita- tively measure how well RPAs maintain emotional fidelity with the characters they portray. Through extensive experiments (§4) and analy- sis (§5) of RPAs powered by seven widely used LLMs with three different role-playing methods (None, RoleLLM and Chat-Haruhi), we pinpoint three key insights: (1) Contrary to intuition, role- playing methods often reduce the emotional fidelity of LLMs in dialogues; (2) Enhancing the general capabilities of LLMs does not necessarily improve the emotional fidelity in RPAs; (3) Supervised Fine- tuning (SFT) or In-Context Learning (ICL) using real dialogue data annotated with emotional states can enhance emotional fidelity. Our contributions are as follows: (1) To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to systematically study the emotional fidelity of  6218

Figure 1: Framework of EmoCharacter.   Left : format of evaluation tasks for assessing emotional fidelity in RPAs.  Upper right : three evaluation settings.   Lower right : metrics designed from both micro and macro perspectives.  RPAs in dialogue. (2) We design six metrics to quantify emo- tional fidelity from both macro and micro perspec- tives and conduct extensive experiments on various LLMs with role-playing methods, drawing conclu- sions that benefit future research. (3) We conduct an in-depth exploration of meth- ods to enhance emotional fidelity, including SFT and ICL. Results indicate their efficacy in improv- ing emotional fidelity.  2   Related Work  LLM-based Role-Playing.   Role-playing agents (RPAs), typically powered by LLMs, are AI sys- tems capable of simulating and interacting as their assigned roles (Chen et al., 2024). Current research mainly focuses on two directions: (1) Developing RPAs for specific roles, such as RoleLLM (Wang et al., 2023b) and Chat-Haruhi (Li et al., 2023), and (2) Training foundation models specialized in role- playing, such as Doubao-Character and character.ai (DoubaoTeam, 2024; character.ai, 2024). To enable RPAs to fully learn and utilize role data, various methods are employed to enhance the role-playing capabilities of LLMs, including setting the role de- scription as a system prompt (Shao et al., 2023; Lu et al., 2024), training with role dialogue data (Shao et al., 2023), and retrieving relevant experiences from role databases (Wang et al., 2023b).  Evaluation of RPAs.   Previous work on evaluat- ing RPAs has mainly focused on two aspects: (1) Role fidelity, including personality fidelity (Wang et al., 2024b) and consistency in role knowledge, experience, and language patterns (Wang et al., 2023b; Shao et al., 2023), and (2) Natural abilities a role should possess, such as multi-turn dialogue capability (Duan et al., 2024), human-likeness (Xie et al., 2024), and attractiveness (Zhou et al., 2023). An ideal RPA should mimic the assigned charac- ter’s tone, embody its personality, and respond with appropriate emotions to enhance immersion and appeal (Chen et al., 2024). However, current evalu- ations overlook emotional fidelity, a crucial aspect of emotional intelligence that significantly affects user experience, thereby motivating the work pre- sented in this paper.  3   EmoCharacter  To evaluate the emotional fidelity between RPAs and their assigned characters, EmoCharacter incor- porates three components, as shown in Figure 1: evaluation task and settings, single-turn and multi- turn dialogue datasets, and evaluation metrics. 6219

3.1   Evaluation Task and Settings Preliminaries.   To assess the emotional fidelity of RPAs, we first need to obtain the responses and emotions generated by the RPA during di- alogue.   Formally, given a turn-taking dialogue between   a   target   character   R   and   a   partici- pant.   We define the ground-truth dialogue as  C n   =   { U   1  gt , U   2  gt , . . . , U   n gt }   and the set of emo- tions associated with each utterance as   E n   =  { E 1  gt , E 2  gt , . . . , E n − 1  gt   , E n gt } . Both the first and last utterances,   U   1  gt   and   U   n gt , are from character   R . The process of obtaining the responses and emotions generated by the RPA playing role   R   is defined as:  ( U   n R , E n R ) =   RPA ( R, C n − 1 , E n − 1 )   (1) We call each   ( R, C n − 1 , E n − 1 )   triplet a test point.  Evaluation settings.   Due to the autoregressive nature of LLMs, variations in the output format can result in significantly different generation out- comes in the subsequent text. To ensure that the obtained emotional response   ( U   n R , E n R )   of the RPA is stable and consistent with those in the RPA’s regular dialogues, we design three evaluation set- tings to capture   ( U   n R , E n R )   from the conversation: (1)   Emotion First : RPA first expresses its current emotion, followed by a response based on that emo- tion. (2)   Emotion and Response : RPA simultane- ously expresses its current emotion and response. (3)   Response First : RPA first provides a response, then expresses the associated emotion.  Task definition.   After obtaining the emotional response   ( U   n R , E n R ) , we define the evaluation task as assessing the consistency between the RPA’s dialogue   ( U   n R , E n R , C n − 1 , E n − 1 )   and ground truth dialogue   ( C n , E n )   using the metrics from §3.3.  3.2   Single-turn and Multi-turn Dataset 3.2.1   PELD-single and PELD-multi  Our single-turn and multi-turn dialogue datasets are derived from the script of classic TV show  “Friends” . Datasets MELD (Poria et al., 2018) and EmoryNLP (Zahiri and Choi, 2017) contributed manually annotated emotion labels for each line. Building on those, (Wen et al., 2021) introduced Personality EmotionLines Dataset (PELD). Each sample in PELD consists of a single-turn dialogue triplet   C 3   =   { U   1  gt , U   2  gt , U   3  gt }   with corresponding emotion labels   E 3   =   { E 1  gt , E 2  gt , E 3  gt } . We adopt PELD as our single-turn dialogue dataset, naming it PELD-single. Since multi-turn dialogues are a more common application scenario for RPAs, we restructure the MELD dataset to extract all two-person multi-turn dialogues to address the lack of multi-turn data in PELD. This results in   C n   =   { U   1  gt , U   2  gt , . . . , U   n gt } , where   n >   3 . We refer to this restructured multi- turn dialogue dataset as PELD-multi. Figure 16 illustrates one example of a multi-turn dialogue. Similar to the MELD and EmoryNLP datasets, both PELD-single and PELD-multi face the class imbalance issue. This imbalance reflects how hu- mans typically express emotions in natural conver- sations, where the majority of dialogue tends to be emotionally neutral. Table 1 shows the specific statistics.   Here, “sentiment” refers to a coarser- grained emotional state, while “emotion” is finer- grained (see Appendix A.1 for details). Category   PELD-single   PELD-multi # Basic Statistics Test Points   6510   1391 Avg. Uttr. Len.   9.32   7.67 Avg. Dialog Len.   3   6.92 # Emotion Joy   3533   1667 Surprise   1889   1341 Neutral   8701   4544 Anger   2340   968 Disgust   376   285 Fear   1346   266 Sadness   1345   601 # Sentiment Positive   5422   3008 Neutral   8701   4544 Negative   5407   2120  Table 1: Statistics for PELD-single and PELD-multi.  3.2.2   Emotion Transition in Dialogue  Characters with different personalities exhibit unique emotional changes during conversations, and these dynamic shifts cannot be captured through simple categorical statistics.   Therefore, we further calculate the emotional transitions for each character in PELD-single and PELD-multi. Specifically, we define an emotional transition as the change from emotion   E i gt   associated with the previous utterance   U   i gt   to emotion   E i +2  gt   associated with the next utterance   U   i +2  gt   by character   R   in a dynamic conversation   C n   =   { U   1  gt , U   2  gt , . . . , U   n gt } , where   0   < i < n   −   2 . The emotion transition matrix is a probability transition matrix, which describes the probability 6220

distribution of character   R   transitioning from the initial emotion   E i gt   to emotion   E i +2  gt   . As shown in Figure 2, in the two transition matrices depicted, the darker areas are primarily concentrated in the first column and along the diagonal, indicating that most transitions occur towards a neutral emotion or remain the same. However, there are subtle differ- ences in the matrices among different characters, especially in the transitions of negative emotions such as anger, sadness, fear, and disgust, where the differences between the two characters are more pronounced. This also indirectly suggests a correla- tion between personality differences and emotional changes. Complete illustration of the matrices are presented in Figures 5 and 6 in Appendix A.2.  Figure 2: Emotion transition matrices for characters “Chandler” (sarcastic and insecure) and “Joey” (charm- ing and naïve) from PELD-single .  3.3   Evaluation Metrics  To comprehensively assess the emotional fidelity of roles in dialogue, we design six metrics at both the micro and macro levels.  3.3.1   Micro Emotional Fidelity  At the micro level, we focus on the consistency between the emotions attached to each utterance by RPAs in the dialogue and those of the original char- acters. We introduce Emotional Consistency Score (EC), along with its lower bound ( EC low ), upper bound ( EC upp ), and Relative Emotional Consis- tency Score (REC), with Semantic Similarity (SS) added as a reference.  Emotional Consistency (EC).   EC   score quanti- fies the alignment between the emotions expressed by RPAs in each response and the emotions of the original characters. Traditional dialogue emotion recognition studies typically treat emotion align- ment as a multi-class classification problem, using weighted F1 score as a metric for model perfor- mance (Zheng et al., 2023; Shi and Huang, 2023; Hu et al., 2023). However, the degree of differ- ence between emotions varies. For instance, the emotional states of “surprise” are quite close to “joy” but significantly differ from “sadness”. The F1 score does not effectively capture these differ- ences between emotions. Therefore, we introduce the concept of emotional similarity ( ES ) based on the Valence-Arousal-Dominance (VAD) emotional state space (Russell and Mehrabian, 1977), where more similar emotions are closer in distance within the VAD space. We define the ES between different emotions   E i   and   E j   as:  ES ( E i , E j   ) =   e − 2 ×∥ ⃗ E i − ⃗   E j   ∥ 2  ∑ 7  k =1 ,k ̸   = i   e − 2 ×∥ ⃗ E i − ⃗ E k   ∥ 2  ,   (2) where ⃗   E i   represents the vector of   E i   in the VAD space, and   || ∗ || 2   is the L2 norm of the vector. When the RPA playing role   R   responds with emotion   E n R   based on context   C n − 1 , and   E n R   differs from the character   R ’s true emotion   E n gt , we calcu- late the emotionally consistent portion and inconsis- tent portion between   E n gt   and   E n R   as   ES ( E n gt , E n R )  and   1   −   ES ( E n gt , E n R ) , respectively. The final EC score is obtained as the weight F1 score sum of  ES ( E n gt , E n R )   and   1   −   ES ( E n gt , E n R ) .   More de- tails are provided in the Appendix B. The original weight F1 score is the loose lower bound of EC, denoted as   EC low . Furthermore, we can calculate the EC score at a coarser granularity. The seven emotion categories (Table 1) in PLED-single and PLED-multi can be grouped into Positive, Neutral, and Negative senti- ment categories. For the RPA playing role   R , when its   E n R   and   E n gt   fall within the same sentiment cat- egory, they are considered the same emotion; oth- erwise, the calculation follows the same method as EC. We call this coarser-grained EC score the upper bound of EC,   EC upp . In summary,   EC low   is the traditional weight F1 score, EC is the weight F1 score adjusted by ES, and   EC upp   is the EC for sentiment category clas- sification. Their relationship is:   0   ≤   EC low   < EC   ≤   EC upp   ≤   1 .   EC upp , as the coarsest emo- tional consistency metric, can be seen as the upper limit of RPAs’ current emotional consistency ca- pability. EC is the metric that best reflects user experience, while   EC low   is the finest emotional consistency metric, reflecting the lower bound of the RPA’s capability.  Relative Emotional Consistency (REC).   When EC is closer to   EC low , it indicates that RPAs con- sistently select emotions that are less aligned with 6221

the ground truth, even though they fall within the correct sentiment category.   This suggests that while the RPAs have the right general emotional direction, they struggle to select the most granular emotion. It also implies that there is greater poten- tial to improve EC through optimization techniques such as prompt engineering or in-context learning. Conversely, when EC approaches   EC upp , it shows that RPAs are better at selecting the most precise emotion within the correct sentiment category, in- dicating that the limiting factor for improving EC is the capability of the base model. To reflect how well RPAs are utilizing the capabilities of the un- derlying LLMs, we introduce   REC , defined as: REC   =   EC   −   EC low  EC upp   −   EC low  (3) As REC approaches 0, EC gets closer to its lower bound   EC low ; conversely, as it approaches 1, EC nears its upper bound   EC upp .  Semantic Similarity (SS).   We define semantic similarity (SS) between two utterances as the co- sine similarity of their embedding vectors, which are generated by the text-embedding-3-small model (OpenAI, 2024).  3.3.2   Macro Emotional Fidelity  At the Macro Level, we focus on whether the emo- tional transition distribution of RPAs during dia- logues aligns with that of the original characters, while also capturing the emotional differences be- tween characters. To evaluate this, we introduce two metrics:   the Emotional Distribution Diver- gence (EDD) score and the Relative Character Di- vergence (RCD) score.  Emotional Distribution Divergence (EDD).  For a given character, the probabilities of differ- ent emotional transitions in dialogues vary, and the emotional transition probability matrix effectively quantifies this variation. Let   M gt   be the emotional probability transition matrix of the target charac- ter   R , and   M R   be the emotional transition matrix generated by the RPA playing   R   in dialogues. We define the KL divergence from   M gt   to   M R   as the  EDD   score for the RPA playing   R : EDD   =   D KL ( M gt   ∥   M R ) ,   (4) where   ∥   denotes the divergence between two prob- ability distributions. A smaller EDD score indi- cates a higher consistency in emotional distribu- tion. To reduce the impact of many zeros in the emotional probability transition matrix, we apply Laplace smoothing in the calculations.  Relative Character Divergence (RCD).   As shown in Figure 2, the emotional transition prob- ability matrices for the characters in PELD-single exhibit slight differences, reflecting the unique char- acteristics of each role. Ideally, RPAs should also demonstrate such differences, providing more per- sonalized dialogues. Let   M R i   and   M R j   be the emo- tional transition matrices of two characters   R i   and  R j   , respectively. We define Character Divergence (CD) as the average Jeffreys divergence (Jeffreys, 1946) between their emotional transition matrices: CD   =  ∑  i  ∑  j   J ( M R i   ∥   M R j   )  N   ,   (5) where   N   is the number of characters in dataset. Based on CD scores, the   RCD   score is further defined as the difference between the divergence scores of the RPA and the original role: RCD   =   CD RPA   −   CD gt   (6) When RCD is closer to 0, it indicates that the dif- ferences between roles played by RPAs align more closely with the original characters. If   RCD   >   0 , it suggests that the RPAs overly emphasize the character differences. Conversely, if   RCD   <   0 , it implies that the emotional distributions between the roles played by the RPAs are too similar, failing to capture their distinct personalities.  4   Experiments  4.1   Experimental Setup Foundation LLMs for RPAs.   We select seven commonly used LLMs from three categories to serve as the foundation LLMs for RPAs: (1) closed- source models from the GPT series, including GPT- 4o, GPT-3.5, and GPT-4o-mini (Achiam et al., 2023), (2) Open-source models from the Llama series, such as Llama3-8b-instruct and Llama3- 70b-instruct   1 (Dubey et al., 2024), and (3) Models specifically trained for role-playing tasks, includ- ing Doubao-character (DoubaoTeam, 2024) and Westlake-7b-v2 (Senseable, 2023).  Prompting   Strategies.   For   the   role-playing methods, we use the system prompt-based ap- proaches proposed in RoleLLM and Chat-Haruhi  1 For convenience, we abbreviate Llama3-8b-instruct and Llama3-70b-instruct as Llama3-8b and Llama3-70b. 6222

to portray the six main characters from   “Friends” , and compare their performance with that of a blank LLM (where the model has no information about the character, referred to as “None”).  Data.   For each combination of LLMs and role- playing methods, we evaluate their performance across the three evaluation settings (§3.1) and re- port the results of the best-performing setting. To ensure consistency in test scale, we use 10% of PELD-single and 50% of PELD-multi as single- turn and multi-turn test sets, respectively, with the remaining data used for the fine-tuning (§5.1.1). See Appendix C for details.  4.2   Main Results  Table 2 presents the results of our evaluation of LLMs and RPAs using EmoCharacter. Based on these results, we observe that: (1) In both single-turn or multi-turn dialogues, the EC scores of LLMs using role-playing meth- ods are lower compared to blank LLMs.   Addi- tionally, the EDD scores tend to increase, with the exception of Doubao. For instance, GPT-4o model without role-playing (None) achieves an EC of 0.484, but this drops to 0.422 and 0.423 with RoleLLM and Chat-Haruhi role-playing prompts, respectively.   This indicates that LLMs struggle with emotional expression during role-playing, re- sulting in reduced emotional fidelity. (2) Regarding RCD, all LLMs show negative val- ues when not engaged in role-playing and positive values when they are, indicating that RPAs indeed reflect the personality traits of characters. However, this also results in excessive differences between characters. (3) Counterintuitively, enhancing the general ca- pabilities of LLMs does not lead to an improve- ment in the emotional fidelity of RPAs. For exam- ple, among the foundation LLMs, GPT-3.5 shows higher EC than GPT-4o-mini, and LLaMA3-70b outperforms LLaMA3-8b in EC, yet both perform worse during role-playing than weaker LLMs. (4) LLMs specifically optimized for role-playing tasks, such as Doubao and Westlake, demonstrate stronger emotional fidelity.   For instance, West- lake achieves an EC score during role-playing that surpasses both GPT-4o and Doubao, attaining the highest   EC upp . Table 3 presents the semantic similarity ( SS ) re- sults of GPT-3.5 under different settings. It can be observed that while emotional fidelity (ES and EDD) decreases with the RoleLLM prompting strategy, the semantic similarity increases from 0.208 to 0.230. This suggests that RPAs indeed become more similar to the role in certain aspects, such as tone and catchphrases. However, when we specify the same emotion to match the role, as in the ‘emo’ setting in the table, the semantic sim- ilarity further improves to 0.289. This indicates that improving emotional fidelity can enhance the quality of responses.  4.3   Relative Emotional Consistency Analysis  Figure 3 illustrates the distribution of REC and EC for different LLMs under the None, RoleLLM, and Chat-Haruhi methods. Full results are avail- able in Appendix C.3. REC indicates the position of EC within the interval ( EC low ,   EC upp ) and re- flects the potential for LLMs to improve EC. We observe that Westlake maintains a high REC across all three methods, with scores of 70.7%, 72.6%, and 67.0%, respectively, achieving good EC even without a high   EC upp . In contrast, Doubao main- tains a high   EC upp   across all methods, but its EC is less impressive, resulting in relatively low REC scores of 52.0%, 55.9%, and 55.7%.   This indi- cates that current role-playing methods have not yet fully utilized Doubao’s potential, and Doubao has greater potential than Westlake to improve EC through prompting and other techniques. The limi- tation in further improving Westlake’s EC may be due to the capabilities of its foundation model.  5   Analysis  5.1   How to Improve Emotional Fidelity? 5.1.1   Real Dialogue Data  Extensive experiments show that the emotional fi- delity of LLMs decreases during role-playing (as shown in Table 2).   To address this, we further explore whether using real dialogue data for SFT could improve emotional fidelity. Specifically, we construct three forms of fine-tuning datasets from 40% of PELD-single dataset according to the three task settings outlined in §3.1 (Emo-First, Emo & Resp, and Resp-First). We select Llama3-8b model for fine-tuning with LoRA (Hu et al., 2021), as it is a widely used general-purpose open-source model for role-playing, and has impressive capa- bilities despite having a relatively small number of parameters. Table 4 presents the emotional fidelity metrics of the fine-tuned models.   We observe that fine- 6223

Single-turn Dialogue   Muti-turn Dialogue Eomtion Consistency   Eomtion Consistency Model   Type lower   ↑   EC   ↑   upper   ↑   EDD   ↓   RCD   ↔   lower   ↑   EC   ↑   upper   ↑   EDD   ↓   RCD   ↔  GPT - series  None   0.340   0.484   0.523   1.300   -0.260   0.343   0.467   0.553   1.554   -0.319  RoleLLM   0.312   0.422   0.489   1.667   2.801   0.300   0.419   0.500   1.813   2.617 GPT-4o Chat-Haruhi   0.283   0.423   0.477   1.874   1.960   0.303   0.433   0.505   1.870   0.503 None   0.318   0.439   0.506   1.007   -1.905   0.328   0.466   0.526   1.550   -0.778  RoleLLM   0.261   0.397   0.454   1.660   0.757   0.290   0.425   0.483   1.983   1.117 GPT-3.5 Chat-Haruhi   0.275   0.399   0.473   1.874   0.347   0.310   0.426   0.486   1.710   1.352 None   0.300   0.420   0.502   1.111   -1.414   0.321   0.436   0.502   1.364   -0.566  RoleLLM   0.264   0.404   0.473   1.760   0.519   0.285   0.414   0.475   1.838   1.790 GPT-4o-mini Chat-Haruhi   0.280   0.407   0.484   1.356   1.460   0.266   0.394   0.476   1.867   2.032  Llama - series  None   0.287   0.427   0.494   1.367   -1.173   0.309   0.437   0.500   1.822   -1.265 RoleLLM   0.169   0.356   0.434   2.910   0.749   0.243   0.402   0.472   2.399   1.360 Llama3-70b Chat-Haruhi   0.317   0.417   0.516   1.244   1.998   0.269   0.410   0.485   2.010   0.507  None   0.260   0.423   0.514   1.742   -1.205   0.303   0.436   0.509   1.845   -0.288  RoleLLM   0.218   0.408   0.489   2.766   0.246   0.224   0.382   0.462   2.511   4.037 Llama-8b Chat-Haruhi   0.307   0.414   0.501   1.260   2.001   0.256   0.430   0.523   1.942   3.322  Role Play LLMs  None   0.313   0.430   0.538   1.410   -0.886   0.288   0.423   0.535   2.420   0.206  RoleLLM   0.290   0.409   0.503   1.185   1.305   0.246   0.384   0.490   2.187   1.094 Doubao- character   Chat-Haruhi   0.288   0.406   0.500   1.159   0.646   0.257   0.391   0.497   2.009   0.524 None   0.326   0.471   0.531   1.152   -2.440 RoleLLM   0.303   0.433   0.482   1.346   0.267 Westlake-7b Chat-Haruhi   0.303   0.429   0.491   1.348   -0.263  *  Table 2: Performance results of base LLMs with role-playing methods on PELD-single and PELD-multi. Best results are in bold.   ↔ : The closer to zero, the better. *: Results for Westlake are not presented for fairness, as it frequently deviates from the setup (e.g., providing irrelevant responses). See Appendix C.3 for complete results.  RPA Method   EC   ↑   EDD   ↓   SS   ↑  GPT-3.5-None   0.439   1.007   0.208 , RoleLLM (GPT-3.5)   0.399   1.660   0.230 RoleLLM (GPT-3.5, emo)   1.000   0.000   0.289  Table 3: Results of EC, EDD, and SS for LLMs in single-turn dialogues. “emo” indicates that the LLM is provided with ground truth emotion prior to responding.  tuning LLMs with real dialogue data can signifi- cantly enhance their EC,   EC low ,   EC upp , and EDD during role-playing, even surpassing powerful gen- eral models like GPT-4o. However, fine-tuning re- duces the role differentiation of LLMs, with RCD becoming negative regardless of the fine-tuning ap- proach. See Appendix C.4 for fine-tuning details.  5.1.2   In-Context Learning (ICL)  Existing RPA work often enhances role-playing abilities by retrieving a character’s historical expe- riences (such as related dialogues from a character database) during interactions, leveraging the ICL  Model   SFT Dataset   Eomtion Consistency   EDD   ↓   RCD   ↔  lower   ↑   EC   ↑   upper   ↑  GPT-4o   /   0.312   0.422   0.489   1.667   2.801 Llama3-8b   /   0.218   0.408   0.489   2.766   0.246  Llama3-8b -sft Emo - First   0.284   0.454   0.489   1.973   -1.678 Emo & Resp   0.340   0.499   0.551   1.680   -0.556 Resp - First   0.311   0.468   0.506   1.695   -0.717  Table 4: Results of fine-tuning Llama3-8b using three different datasets.  capability of LLMs. To further explore the impact of different ICL settings on the emotional fidelity of RPAs, we select 192 test points from PELD- multi and define n-shot as adding n rounds of real dialogues before the test point as a reference. Ta- ble 5 shows the performance of RPAs using the RoleLLM and Chat-Haruhi prompting strategies in terms of EC,   EC low ,   EC upp , and REC under different shot settings. We observe that as the num- ber of shots increases, the model’s EC shows an upward trend, but the improvement is limited. 6224

Figure 3: Relative emotional consistency results for different role-playing methods on PELD-single (ordered by EC in ascending order). Besides REC bar charts, colored lines show EC and its upper and lower bounds for comparison.  Shot   lower   ↑   EC   ↑   upper   ↑  RoleLLM (GPT-3.5 base)  0-shot   0.276   0.410   0.488 1-shot   0.336   0.441   0.514 2-shot   0.309   0.436   0.544  3-shot   0.330   0.445   0.525  Chat-Haruhi (GPT-3.5 base)  0-shot   0.234   0.375   0.480 1-shot   0.269   0.389   0.480 2-shot   0.269   0.392   0.475 3-shot   0.307   0.418   0.495  Table 5:   Emotional Consistency of GPT-3.5 with RoleLLM and Chat-Haruhi under 0-3 ICL shot settings.  5.2   Case Study: Why Emotional Infidelity?  In extensive experiments, we observe that even the most advanced LLMs struggle to maintain high emotional fidelity during role-playing dialogues. The emotional fidelity of LLMs is often lower than when they are not engaging in role-playing.   To explore the reasons behind this decline and the emotional discrepancies between RPAs and real characters, we conduct a case study. We test the GPT-3.5 model using RoleLLM and Chat-Haruhi on the complete PELD-single dataset.   Figure 4 shows the original emotion transition matrix for character “Joey” and the matrices for the LLM itself (None) and when it plays the character of “Joey” using RoleLLM and Chat-Haruhi. As seen in Figure 4, the first three columns of the emotional transition matrices for RoleLLM and Chat-Haruhi are notably dark, indicating that RPAs tend to use neutral and positive emotions like ‘Neu- tral’, ‘Joy’, and ‘Surprise’ in their responses, while rarely employing negative emotions. This signifi- cantly diverges from the character’s original emo- tional state, which may result from emotional bias  Figure 4: Real emotion transformation matrix of “Joey” in PELD-single and matrices generated using RoleLLM and Chat-Haruhi. “None” indicates use of blank LLMs.  introduced during the RLHF (Reinforcement Learn- ing from Human Feedback) phase of training LLMs (e.g., certain emotional biases are already evident in the emotion transition matrix for None.) (Bai et al., 2022; Ouyang et al., 2022; Cao et al., 2024), or from an over-adherence to the system prompt (as character descriptions often emphasize positive traits) (Wang et al., 2024a; Lou et al., 2024). See more case studies in Appendix C.5.  6   Conclusion  We proposed EmoCharacter to evaluate the emo- tional fidelity of RPAs from both macro and mi- cro perspectives.   With extensive evaluations of multiple LLMs and role-playing methods, we pin- pointed that even state-of-the-art LLMs like GPT- 4o experience a decline in emotional fidelity during role-playing dialogues. Our case studies revealed that LLMs often use overly distinct emotions to 6225

express character traits, leading to low emotional fi- delity. Additionally, we found that fine-tuning with real dialogue data and using in-context learning both benefit the RPAs’ emotional fidelity. We hope EmoCharacter will facilitate research on building RPAs with greater emotional intelligence.  7   Limitations  In this study, we conducted a comprehensive evalu- ation of the emotional fidelity of RPAs, but some limitations remain.   Firstly, to obtain emotional labels for each response in RPA dialogues, we es- tablished three test settings to ensure the validity of our conclusions as much as possible, though biases may still exist.   Secondly, due to computational constraints, we only fine-tuned Llama3-8b with LoRA in §5.1.1. Future efforts will aim to extend these results to larger LLMs, such as Llama3-70b. Lastly, this study focuses solely on the text modal- ity, whereas in real emotional interactions, informa- tion such as voice, gestures, and facial expressions is equally crucial. Therefore, future research will expand to multimodal dialogue.  8   Ethical Considerations  In this study, we used dialogue datasets sourced from publicly available and widely researched re- sources, and the LLMs employed were accessed via publicly available APIs or parameters. There- fore, we do not anticipate any ethical issues arising from the research.   Additionally, evaluating the emotional fidelity of RPAs can reveal their emo- tional state distribution and, to some extent, predict the probability of generating toxic content. If RPAs exhibit a significant amount of negative emotions, caution should be exercised, and measures should be taken to mitigate associated risks. Lastly, we confirm that all authors are aware of and adhere to the ACL ethics guidelines.  Acknowledgments  This work is supported by Natural Science Foun- dation of China (No. 62172101), the Science and Technology Commission of Shanghai Municipal- ity (No. 23511100602), and the Fundamental Re- search Funds for the Central Universities of China (No. 2023110139).  References  Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad,   Ilge Akkaya,   Florencia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. 2023. Gpt-4 technical report.  arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774 . Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova Dassarma, Dawn Drain, Stanislav   Fort,   Deep   Ganguli,   Tom   Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Saurav Kadavath, John Kernion, Tom Conerly, Sheer El-Showk, Nelson Elhage, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Tristan Hume, Scott Johnston, Shauna Kravec, Liane Lovitt, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Dario Amodei, Tom B. Brown, Jack Clark, Sam McCandlish, Christopher Olah, Benjamin Mann, and Jared Kaplan. 2022. Training a helpful and harmless assistant with re- inforcement learning from human feedback.   ArXiv , abs/2204.05862. Yuji Cao, Huan Zhao, Yuheng Cheng, Ting Shu, Guo- long Liu, Gaoqi Liang, Junhua Zhao, and Yun Li. 2024. Survey on large language model-enhanced re- inforcement learning: Concept, taxonomy, and meth- ods.   ArXiv , abs/2404.00282. Che-Jui Chang, Samuel S. Sohn, Sen Zhang, Rajath Jayashankar, Muhammad Usman, and Mubbasir Ka- padia. 2023. The importance of multimodal emotioth conditioning and affect consistency for embodied conversational agents.   Proceedings of the 28th Inter- national Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces . character.ai. 2024. Personalized ai for every moment of your day.   https://character.ai/about . Ac- cessed: 2024-10-10. Hongshen Chen, Xiaorui Liu, Dawei Yin, and Jiliang Tang. 2017. A survey on dialogue systems: Recent advances and new frontiers.   ArXiv , abs/1711.01731. Jiangjie Chen, Xintao Wang, Rui Xu, Siyu Yuan, Yikai Zhang, Wei Shi, Jian Xie, Shuang Li, Ruihan Yang, Tinghui Zhu, et al. 2024. From persona to person- alization: A survey on role-playing language agents.  arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.18231 . DoubaoTeam.   2024.   Doubao-pro.   https: //console.volcengine.com/ark/region:ark+ cn-beijing/model/detail?Id=doubao-pro-4k . Accessed: 2024-10-10. Haodong Duan, Jueqi Wei, Chonghua Wang, Hong- wei Liu, Yixiao Fang, Songyang Zhang, Dahua Lin, and Kai Chen. 2024. BotChat: Evaluating LLMs’ capabilities of having multi-turn dialogues. In   Find- ings of the Association for Computational Linguis- tics: NAACL 2024 , pages 3184–3200, Mexico City, Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics. Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, et al. 2024. The llama 3 herd of models.   arXiv e-prints , pages arXiv–2407. 6226

Paul Ekman and Richard J. Davidson. 1994. The nature of emotion: Fundamental questions. Wensheng Gan, Zhenlian Qi, Jiayang Wu, and Chun- Wei Lin. 2023.   Large language models in educa- tion: Vision and opportunities.   2023 IEEE Inter- national Conference on Big Data (BigData) , pages 4776–4785. Dou Hu, Yinan Bao, Lingwei Wei, Wei Zhou, and Songlin Hu. 2023. Supervised adversarial contrastive learning for emotion recognition in conversations. In  Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the As- sociation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 10835–10852, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics. J. Edward Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, and Weizhu Chen. 2021.   Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models.   ArXiv , abs/2106.09685. Harold Jeffreys. 1946. An invariant form for the prior probability in estimation problems.   Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A. Mathematical and Physical Sciences , 186(1007):453–461. Marja Kokkonen and Lea Pulkkinen. 1999. Emotion regulation strategies in relation to personality char- acteristics indicating low and high self-control of emotions.   Personality and Individual Differences , 27:913–932. Cheng Li, Ziang Leng, Chenxi Yan, Junyi Shen, Hao Wang, Weishi Mi, Yaying Fei, Xiaoyang Feng, Song Yan, HaoSheng Wang, Linkang Zhan, Yaokai Jia, Pingyu Wu, and Haozhen Sun. 2023.   Chatharuhi: Reviving anime character in reality via large language model.   ArXiv , abs/2308.09597. Renze Lou, Kai Zhang, and Wenpeng Yin. 2024. Large language model instruction following: A survey of progresses and challenges.   Computational Linguis- tics , 50(3):1053–1095. Keming Lu, Bowen Yu, Chang Zhou, and Jingren Zhou. 2024. Large language models are superpositions of all characters: Attaining arbitrary role-play via self- alignment.   arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.12474 . OpenAI.   2024.   New   embedding   models   and api   updates.   https://openai.com/index/ new-embedding-models-and-api-updates/ . Accessed: 2024-10-10. Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kelton, Luke E. Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Pe- ter Welinder, Paul Francis Christiano, Jan Leike, and Ryan J. Lowe. 2022. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback.   ArXiv , abs/2203.02155. Joon Sung Park, Joseph O’Brien, Carrie Jun Cai, Mered- ith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and Michael S Bern- stein. 2023. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. In   Proceedings of the 36th an- nual acm symposium on user interface software and technology , pages 1–22. Soujanya Poria, Devamanyu Hazarika, Navonil Ma- jumder, Gautam Naik, E. Cambria, and Rada Mihal- cea. 2018. Meld: A multimodal multi-party dataset for emotion recognition in conversations.   ArXiv , abs/1810.02508. James A Russell and Albert Mehrabian. 1977. Evidence for a three-factor theory of emotions.   Journal of Research in Personality , 11(3):273–294. Senseable. 2023. Westlake-7b-v2: Role-play & text gen- eration specialist model.   https://huggingface. co/senseable/WestLake-7B-v2 . Accessed: 2024- 10-10. Yunfan Shao, Linyang Li, Junqi Dai, and Xipeng Qiu. 2023.   Character-LLM: A trainable agent for role- playing. In   Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process- ing , pages 13153–13187, Singapore. Association for Computational Linguistics. Tao Shi and Shao-Lun Huang. 2023. MultiEMO: An attention-based correlation-aware multimodal fusion framework for emotion recognition in conversations. In   Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 14752–14766, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics. Yu-Min Tseng, Yu-Chao Huang, Teng-Yun Hsiao, Yu- Ching Hsu, Jia-Yin Foo, Chao-Wei Huang, and Yun- Nung Chen. 2024. Two tales of persona in llms: A survey of role-playing and personalization.   ArXiv , abs/2406.01171. Hongru Wang, Lingzhi Wang, Yiming Du, Liang Chen, Jing Zhou, Yufei Wang, and Kam-Fai Wong. 2023a. A survey of the evolution of language model-based dialogue systems.   ArXiv , abs/2311.16789. Jiahao Wang, Bolin Zhang, Qianlong Du, Jiajun Zhang, and Dianhui Chu. 2024a. A survey on data selection for llm instruction tuning.   ArXiv , abs/2402.05123. Xintao Wang, Yunze Xiao, Jen-tse Huang, Siyu Yuan, Rui Xu, Haoran Guo, Quan Tu, Yaying Fei, Ziang Leng, Wei Wang, Jiangjie Chen, Cheng Li, and Yanghua Xiao. 2024b. InCharacter: Evaluating per- sonality fidelity in role-playing agents through psy- chological interviews. In   Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 1840– 1873, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computa- tional Linguistics. Zekun Moore Wang, Zhongyuan Peng, Haoran Que, Jiaheng   Liu,   Wangchunshu   Zhou,   Yuhan   Wu, Hongcheng Guo, Ruitong Gan, Zehao Ni, Man 6227

Zhang, et al. 2023b. Rolellm: Benchmarking, elic- iting, and enhancing role-playing abilities of large language models.   arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.00746 . Zhiyuan Wen, Jiannong Cao, Ruosong Yang, Shuaiqi Liu, and Jiaxing Shen. 2021.   Automatically se- lect emotion for response via personality-affected emotion transition. In   Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL-IJCNLP 2021 , pages 5010–5020, Online. Association for Computa- tional Linguistics. Qiuejie Xie, Qiming Feng, Tianqi Zhang, Qingqiu Li, Linyi Yang, Yuejie Zhang, Rui Feng, Liang He, Shang Gao, and Yue Zhang. 2024. Human simulacra: Benchmarking the personification of large language models.   arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.18180 . Qu Yang, Mang Ye, and Bo Du. 2024. Emollm: Multi- modal emotional understanding meets large language models.   ArXiv , abs/2406.16442. Zihao Yi, Jiarui Ouyang, Yuwen Liu, Tianhao Liao, Zhe Xu, and Ying Shen. 2024. A survey on recent advances in llm-based multi-turn dialogue systems.  ArXiv , abs/2402.18013. Sayyed M. Zahiri and Jinho D. Choi. 2017.   Emo- tion detection on tv show transcripts with sequence- based   convolutional   neural   networks.   ArXiv , abs/1708.04299. Wenjie Zheng, Jianfei Yu, Rui Xia, and Shijin Wang. 2023. A facial expression-aware multimodal multi- task learning framework for emotion recognition in multi-party conversations. In   Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 15445– 15459, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computa- tional Linguistics. Jinfeng Zhou, Zhuang Chen, Dazhen Wan, Bosi Wen, Yi Song, Jifan Yu, Yongkang Huang, Libiao Peng, Jiaming Yang, Xiyao Xiao, et al. 2023. Character- glm: Customizing chinese conversational ai char- acters with large language models.   arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.16832 .  A   More Details on Datasets  A.1   Categories of Emotion and VAD Space  In this paper, we classify emotions in dialogue into six basic categories:   anger, disgust, fear, joy, sad- ness, surprise , along with the intermediate emotion,  neutral   (Ekman and Davidson, 1994). Furthermore, we group these emotions into Positive, Negative, and Neutral categories.   Russell and Mehrabian (1977) projected these emotions onto the Valence- Arousal-Dominance (VAD) space, quantifying the intensity of emotions across three dimensions. De- tails are presented in Table 6.  Basic Emotion   (Valence, Arousal, Dominance)  Positive   Joy   (0.81, 0.51, 0.46) Surprise   (0.40, 0.67, -0.13) Neutral   Neutral   (0.00, 0.00, 0.00) Negative Anger   (-0.51, 0.59, 0.25) Disgust   (-0.60, 0.35, 0.11) Fear   (-0.62, 0.82, -0.43) Sadness   (-0.63, -0.27, -0.33)  Table 6: Emotions in VAD space  A.2   Emotion probability transition matrices in PELD-single and PELD-multi  Figures 5 and Figures 6 show the emotion transition matrices for the six main characters in the PLED- single and PLED-multi datasets, respectively.  B   More Details on Evaluation Metrics  Lower bound of EC ( EC low ).   In §3.3.1 we use the weighted F1 score as   EC low . Specifically, for each emotion category, we calculate its true posi- tives ( TP ), false positives ( FP ), and false negatives ( FN ). Here,   TP   refers to the number of samples where the actual value is positive and is also pre- dicted as positive by the classifier.   FP   refers to the number of samples where the actual value is negative but is predicted as positive by the classi- fier.   FN   refers to the number of samples where the actual value is positive but is predicted as negative by the classifier. Then, we calculate   precision   and  recall   for each emotion category as follows:  P recision   =   T P T P   +   F P   (7)  recall   =   T P T P   +   F N   (8)  F   1 = 2   ·   P recision   ·   Recall P recision   +   Recall   (9) Let the number of samples in the seven differ- ent emotion categories be   n 1 , n 2 , . . . , n 7 , and their respective F1 scores be   F   1 1 , F   1 2 , . . . , F   1 7 . We derive   EC low   by calculating the weighted F1 score 6228

Figure 5: Emotion transition matrices of the main characters in PELD-single.  Figure 6: Emotion transition matrices for the main characters in PELD-multi.  as follows:  EC low   =   Weighted F1   =  7 ∑  i =1  n i   ×   F   1 i  7 ∑  i =1  n i  (10)  EC.   In our calculation of   EC low , we review the method for computing the weighted F1 score. It is evident that   EC low   serves as a stringent metric due to its strict evaluation criteria. For example, when the target emotion is “joy”, any prediction of a different emotion is automatically classified as a FP, leading to an increment in the FP count while the TP count remains unchanged. Only when the predicted emotion matches the target “joy” does the TP count increase by one. This stringent criterion limits the metric’s ability to account for potential correlations among emotions. As illustrated in Fig-  Figure 7: Emotional similarity between different emo- tions. The left diagram shows a high emotional similar- ity between “joy” ( E i ) and “surprise” ( E j   ), indicated by a larger overlap ( ES ( E i , E j   ) ). The right diagram illus- trates a lower similarity between “joy” and “sadness”, with a smaller overlap, highlighting varying degrees of emotional correlation.  ure 7, the similarity between “joy” and “surprise” is evidently higher than that between “joy” and “sadness”, yet such nuances are not captured by the current approach. To address this, we introduce ES to quantify 6229

the degree of similarity between different emo- tions and adjust   T P   ,   F P   , and   F N   accordingly. For instance, if “joy” is predicted as “surprise” in a sample, the   T P   for “joy” category is up- dated to   T P   +   ES ( joy, surprise ) ,   F P   is up- dated to   F P   + (1   −   ES ( joy, surprise )) , and the   F N   for “surprise” category is updated to  F N   + (1   −   ES ( joy, surprise )) . We denote these adjusted values as   T P   ′ ,   F P   ′ , and   F N   ′ . Based on these adjusted values, we calculate the ES-adjusted F1 score,   F1 ′ , using Eq.9. Finally, the formula for calculating EC is:  EC   =  7 ∑  i =1  n i   ×   F   1 ′  i  7 ∑  i =1  n i  (11) From Eq. 2, it follows that   0   < ES <   1 , leading to the inequalities:      T P   ′   > T P F P   ′   < F P F N   ′   < F N  ⇒   F1 ′   >   F1   ⇒   ES > ES low .  (12) Therefore, we refer to   EC low   as a loose lower bound of EC. Since EC considers the similarity be- tween emotions, it better reflects the true emotional consistency of RPAs in dialogue, more accurately representing the user’s real experience.  Upper bound of EC ( EC upp ).   As shown in Fig- ure 6, the seven emotions can be grouped into three coarse-grained sentiments: Positive, Neutral, and Negative. Given the ground truth emotion   E gt   and the emotion generated by the RPA,   E RPA , the eval- uation approach depends on whether   E gt   and   E RPA  fall within the same sentiment category. If they belong to different sentiment groups, the calcula- tion follows the original   EC   metric. Conversely, if  E gt   and   E RPA   are within the same sentiment group, they are treated as the same emotion. For instance, when   E gt   is “joy” and   E RPA   is “surprise”, the true positive ( T P   ) count for the “joy” category is in- cremented by one. However, if   E RPA   is “sadness”, the calculation reverts to the original   EC   metric. This modified metric,   EC upp , can be interpreted as a sentiment-consistency (coarse-grained) adjusted version of the original EC, representing the upper bound of the RPA’s performance.  EDD and RCD   In §3.3.2, we use KL divergence between probability matrices to calculate EDD. The KL divergence between probability matrices  M 1   and   M 2   is defined as:  D KL ( M 1   ∥   M 2 ) =   ∑  i  ∑  j  M   ij  1   log  (  M   ij  1  M   ij  2  )  ,  (13) Since KL divergence is asymmetric, we use Jef- freys divergence to calculate RCD:  J ( M 1   ∥   M 2 ) =  1 2   D KL ( M 1 || M 2 ) +  1 2   D KL ( M 2 || M 1 )   (14)  Validity of the metric   To further validate the effectiveness of our evaluation framework, we con- ducted additional experiments to verify the similar- ity between experimental conclusions and human preferences.   We enlisted three graduate student volunteers to score the model’s responses by com- paring them with the ground truth (i.e., the original character’s responses). The volunteers were asked to determine which response’s emotional expres- sion was more aligned with the emotions the target character might likely exhibit (scoring from 0 to 1; if one response received a score of x, the other would receive a score of 1-x). Table 7 presents the results of the human preferences. Method   EC_low   EC   EC_upp   HF None   0.318   0.439   0.506   0.382  RoleLLM   0.261   0.397   0.454   0.264 Chat-haruhi   0.275   0.399   0.473   0.270  Table 7: Human feedback (HF) on responses from dif- ferent methods. (based on GPT-3.5)  Application strategy of metrics or evaluation frameworks.   Since our metrics rely on manually annotated emotion labels in the dialogue dataset as ground truth, there are instances where this ground truth might be missing. To address this, we propose two strategies to enhance the applicability of our evaluation framework: (1) using a dialogue emo- tion recognition model to generate pseudo-labels for dialogues. (2) Employing a character dataset with ground truth as a validation set to optimize the emotional fidelity of role-playing methods, and then using the optimized methods to portray the target character. 6230

C   More Details and Results from Experiments  C.1   Versions and System Prompts of LLMs  Table 8 shows the versions of all LLMs used in the experimental section. Figure 8 shows the prompts used in the RoleLLM and Chat-Haruhi prompting strategies. Figures 9 and 10 display the descriptive information for different characters. Model   Version  GPT - series  GPT-4o   gpt-4o-2024-05-13 GPT-3.5   gpt-3.5-turbo-0125 GPT-4o-mini   gpt-4o-mini-2024-07-18  Llama - series  Llama3-8b   Llama3-8b-instruct Llama3-70b   Llama3-70b-instruct  Role Play LLMs  Westlake-7b   WestLake-7B-v2 Doubao-character   Doubao-pro-4k-character-240728  Table 8: Versions of LLMs.  C.2   More Details for Evaluation Settings  Figures 11, 12, and 13 show the prompts used in different evaluation settings. In fact, to refine the experiment further, the Emotion and Response (ER) in the evaluation settings can be be further bro- ken down into Simultaneous-Emotion First (SEF) and Simultaneous-Response First (SRF). However, since the results obtained from these two setups are quite similar in most scenarios, we use SEF as the ER result.  C.3   Complete Experimental Results.  Tables 9, 10, and 11 present the full test results of different series of LLMs on PELD-single, while Tables 12, 13, and 14 show the complete test results on PELD-multi.   Here,   EF   stands for “Emotion First”,   ER   for “Emotion and Respond”, and   RF  for “Respond First”. We highlight the relatively better results from these three test settings in the main results. The error rate indicates the proportion of instances where the model’s response contains emotions outside our predefined range or irrelevant content. We do not consider results with an error rate exceeding 10%. The REC results for multi- turn dialogues are shown in Figure 14.  C.4   More Details on the Supervised Fine-Tuning.  We use LoRA to fine-tune Llama3-8b-instruct with the following parameter settings:   epoch : 3;   att_dropout :   0.1;   learning_rate :   0.00001;  lora_alpha : 64;   lora_dropout : 0.1;   lora_rank : 64;  warmup_step_rate : 0.05.  C.5   Additional Case Studies.  Figure 15 presents additional case studies. 6231

Prompt for RoleLLM  You are {role_name}, your description is: {role_description}. Now please answer some questions to accurately show your personality traits! Your speaking style should fully imitate the personality role assigned to you! You must always remember that you are only assigned one personality role. Don’t be verbose or too formal or polite when speaking.  Prompt for Chat-Haruhi  I want you to act like {role_name} from   ‘Friends’ . I want you to respond and answer like {role_name} using the tone, manner, and vocabulary {role_name}. Your description is: {role_description}.  Figure 8: Prompts used in RoleLLM and Chat-Haruhi prompting strategies.  Chandler’s Description  Chandler Bing is known for his quick-witted and sarcastic humor, which defines much of his personality in the TV series   ‘Friends’ . He often uses humor as a shield to avoid dealing with his emotions and insecurities stemming from his parents’ tumultuous divorce and his father’s unconventional lifestyle. Despite his penchant for sarcasm, Chandler is also incredibly loyal and caring. He values his friendships deeply and is always ready to support his friends in times of need.  Joey’s Description  Joey Tribbiani from   ‘Friends’   is affable, simple-minded, and loyal. He’s an aspiring actor, known for his love of food and optimistic outlook. Despite appearing naive, Joey is empathetic and caring. He often provides comic relief but also shows deep emotional depth. His charm and protective nature make him beloved among his friends, emphasizing his loyalty and affection.  Ross’s Description  Ross Geller from   ‘Friends’   is intellectual, sensitive, and socially awkward. He’s a paleontologist known for his rationality and scientific mindset, contrasting with his friends’ laid-back attitudes. He is loving and devoted, especially to his family and son, though he can be overly serious and jealous. His passion for dinosaurs and history, nerdy traits, and occasional anger add complexity to his character.  Figure 9: Descriptions of the three main characters (Chandler, Joey, and Ross) in   ‘Friends’ 6232

Monica’s Description  Monica Geller from   ‘Friends’   is competitive, highly organized, and obsessively clean. She is a professional chef, showcasing her passion and perfectionism. Monica often acts as the mother hen of her group, being nurturing yet sometimes overly controlling. Despite her strong-willed nature, she is loyal and humorous, especially about her compulsiveness. Her story includes personal growth, dealing with family and love issues. Monica’s mix of strength, vulnerability, and maternal qualities make her a central and beloved character.  Phoebe’s Description  Phoebe Buffay from   ‘Friends’   is quirky, eccentric, and free-spirited. She’s a masseuse and self-taught musician known for her humorous and bizarre songs. Phoebe’s un- conventional past, including living on the streets, shapes her unique worldview. She’s empathetic, connected to spirituality, and refreshingly honest. Despite her oddities, Phoebe is fiercely loyal, compassionate, and protective of her friends. Her resilience and individuality make her a beloved and standout character in the series.  Rachel’s Description  Rachel Green from   ‘Friends’   starts as a spoiled, naive woman and evolves into an independent, successful fashion professional. Initially a waitress, she climbs the fashion industry ladder, showcasing her style and personal growth. Rachel is warm, affectionate, and romantic. She’s also humorous and quirky, endearing her to her friends and the audience. Rachel values her friendships deeply, displaying loyalty and compassion. Her journey from dependency to independence, coupled with her loving nature, makes her a cherished character.  Figure 10: Descriptions of the other three main characters (Monica, Phoebe, and Rachel) in   ‘Friends’ 6233

Prompt Template for Emotion First (EF)  System Prompt : {System_prompt_for_character R}  Assistant Prompt : {utterance_1}  User Prompt : {utterance_2} ...  Assistant Prompt : {utterance_n-2}  User Prompt : {utterance_n-1}  User Prompt : Please state the emotion you are experiencing after the previous exchange, selecting one of the following seven emotions: {’anger’, ’disgust’, ’fear’, ’joy’, ’neutral’, ’sadness’, ’surprise’}. !!Note: do not respond with any emotion categories other than these seven, simply answer with the word for the emotion you choose.  Assistant Prompt   (waiting for responses from RPAs): {RPA’s response_1}  User Prompt : Please respond to the previous exchange using the emotion of {RPA’s response_1}.  Assistant   (waiting for responses from RPAs): {RPA’s response_2}  Figure 11: Prompt Template for Emotion First (EF)  Prompt Template for Emotion and Response (ER)  System Prompt : {System_prompt_for_character R} + "When responding, use the JSON format, for example, {’emotion’: ’fear’, ’content’: ’No don’t, I beg of you!’}. ’emotion’ represents the emotion used in the response, which has seven types: ’anger’, ’disgust’, ’fear’, ’joy’, ’neutral’, ’sadness’, ’surprise’. ’content’ represents the content of the reply."  Assistant Prompt : {’emotion’: emotion_1, ’content’: utterance_1}  User Prompt : {’emotion’: emotion_2, ’content’: utterance_2} ...  Assistant Prompt : {’emotion’: emotion_n-2, ’content’: utterance_n-2}  User Prompt : {’emotion’: emotion_n-1, ’content’: utterance_n-1}  Assistant   (waiting for responses from RPAs): {RPA’s response}  Figure 12: Prompt Template for Emotion and Response (ER) 6234

Prompt Template for Response First (RF)  System Prompt : {System_prompt_for_character R}  Assistant Prompt : {utterance_1}  User Prompt : {utterance_2} ...  Assistant Prompt : {utterance_n-2}  User Prompt : {utterance_n-1}  Assistant Prompt   (waiting for responses from RPAs): {RPA’s response_1}  User Prompt : Please state the emotion you attached to your response to the previous sentence, selecting one of the following seven emotions:{’anger’, ’disgust’, ’fear’, ’joy’, ’neutral’, ’sadness’, ’surprise’}. !!Note: do not respond with any emotion categories other than these seven, simply answer with the word for the emotion you choose."  Assistant   (waiting for responses from RPAs): {RPA’s response_2}  Figure 13: Prompt Template for Response First (RF)  Figure 14: Relative emotional consistency results for different role-playing methods on PELD-multi (ordered by EC in ascending order). Besides REC bar charts, colored lines show EC and its upper and lower bounds for comparison. 6235

Model   Type   Eomtion Consistency   EDD   RCD   Error rate lower   EC   upper   REC  GPT4o None EF   0.336   0.479   0.521   0.773   1.286   -1.183   0.005  ER   0.340   0.484   0.523   0.787   1.300   -0.260   0.027 RF   0.317   0.454   0.505   0.729   1.352   -2.605   0.008 RoleLLM EF   0.312   0.422   0.489   0.621   1.667   2.801   0.008  ER   0.306   0.424   0.495   0.624   1.672   4.582   0.018 RF   0.304   0.418   0.471   0.683   1.682   1.422   0.016 Chat- Haruhi EF   0.292   0.419   0.475   0.694   1.418   1.691   0.002  ER   0.283   0.423   0.477   0.722   1.874   1.960   0.029 RF   0.257   0.390   0.459   0.658   1.773   1.267   0.005 GPT3.5 None EF   0.318   0.439   0.506   0.644   1.007   -1.905   0.000  ER   0.317   0.432   0.509   0.599   1.047   -0.621   0.003 RF   0.286   0.426   0.474   0.745   1.517   -3.379   0.005 RoleLLM EF   0.261   0.397   0.454   0.705   1.660   0.757   0.008 ER   0.256   0.373   0.442   0.629   1.812   4.283   0.002  RF   0.250   0.376   0.449   0.633   1.858   3.670   0.010 Chat- Haruhi EF   0.275   0.399   0.473   0.626   1.360   0.347   0.006 ER   0.256   0.371   0.442   0.618   1.930   4.263   0.003  RF   0.254   0.383   0.455   0.642   1.731   1.860   0.005 GPT4o-mini None EF   0.300   0.420   0.502   0.594   1.111   -1.414   0.009  ER   0.281   0.398   0.509   0.513   1.452   -0.348   0.012 RF   0.277   0.414   0.472   0.703   1.487   -3.054   0.067 RoleLLM EF   0.264   0.404   0.473   0.670   1.760   0.519   0.017 ER   0.169   0.315   0.416   0.591   2.544   3.862   0.015 RF   0.226   0.361   0.433   0.652   1.978   4.363   0.012  Chat- Haruhi EF   0.280   0.407   0.484   0.623   1.356   1.460   0.000  ER   0.185   0.322   0.410   0.609   2.529   1.890   0.029 RF   0.240   0.371   0.459   0.598   1.739   1.993   0.015  Table 9: Evaluation results of GPT series models on PELD-single.   EF   stands for “Emotion First”,   ER   for “Emotion and Respond”, and   RF   for “Respond First”.   Error rate   indicates the proportion of instances where the model’s response contains emotions outside predefined range or irrelevant content. 6236

Model   Type   Eomtion Consistency   EDD   RCD   Error rate lower   EC   upper   REC  Llama3-70b None EF   0.287   0.427   0.494   0.676   1.367   -1.173   0.033 ER   0.214   0.358   0.461   0.583   1.724   -2.067   0.178 RF   0.296   0.427   0.472   0.744   1.418   -2.245   0.005  RoleLLM EF   0.169   0.356   0.434   0.706   2.910   0.749   0.012 ER   0.205   0.350   0.420   0.674   2.281   3.479   0.315 RF   0.174   0.320   0.396   0.658   2.858   3.753   0.011  Chat- Haruhi EF   0.317   0.417   0.516   0.503   1.244   1.998   0.009  ER   0.230   0.402   0.512   0.610   2.500   7.904   0.263 RF   0.262   0.396   0.486   0.598   1.864   6.920   0.015 Llama3-8b None EF   0.260   0.423   0.514   0.642   1.742   -1.205   0.022 ER   0.235   0.396   0.491   0.629   1.780   -2.603   0.336 RF   0.303   0.414   0.509   0.539   1.474   -0.896   0.018  RoleLLM EF   0.218   0.408   0.489   0.701   2.766   0.246   0.075 ER   0.249   0.416   0.513   0.633   2.085   4.761   0.105 RF   0.219   0.371   0.457   0.639   2.225   4.804   0.024  Chat- Haruhi EF   0.307   0.414   0.501   0.552   1.260   2.001   0.006  ER   0.230   0.403   0.511   0.616   2.475   7.036   0.261 RF   0.265   0.401   0.495   0.591   1.815   6.862   0.017  Table 10: Evaluation results of Llama series models on PELD-single.  Model   Type   Eomtion Consistency   EDD   RCD   Error rate lower   EC   upper   REC  Doubao- character None EF   0.278   0.418   0.526   0.565   1.346   -1.024   0.006 ER   0.313   0.430   0.538   0.520   1.410   -0.886   0.017 RF   0.286   0.424   0.508   0.622   1.458   -0.331   0.005  RoleLLM EF   0.257   0.402   0.517   0.558   1.606   0.098   0.006  ER   0.211   0.345   0.470   0.517   2.161   0.639   0.020 RF   0.290   0.409   0.503   0.559   1.185   1.305   0.017 Chat- Haruhi EF   0.288   0.406   0.500   0.557   1.159   0.646   0.000  ER   0.200   0.334   0.456   0.523   2.221   0.511   0.029 RF   0.256   0.381   0.486   0.543   1.656   1.413   0.023 Westlake-7b None EF   0.290   0.429   0.481   0.728   1.339   -1.492   0.049  ER   0.326   0.471   0.531   0.707   1.152   -2.440   0.457 RF   0.272   0.411   0.453   0.768   1.517   -2.444   0.083 RoleLLM EF   0.303   0.433   0.482   0.726   1.346   0.267   0.065  ER   0.278   0.438   0.491   0.751   1.602   -2.148   0.598 RF   0.210   0.332   0.389   0.682   2.288   -0.384   0.066 Chat- Haruhi EF   0.303   0.429   0.491   0.670   1.348   -0.263   0.021  ER   0.282   0.423   0.476   0.727   1.314   -1.107   0.387 RF   0.188   0.314   0.372   0.685   2.259   -0.550   0.037  Table 11: Evaluation results of role-playing LLMs on PELD-single.   EF   stands for “Emotion First”,   ER   for “Emotion and Respond”, and   RF   for “Respond First”.   Error rate   indicates the proportion of instances where model’s response contains emotions outside predefined range or irrelevant content. 6237

Model   Type   Eomtion Consistency   EDD   RCD   Error rate lower   EC   upper   REC  GPT4o None EF   0.338   0.456   0.528   0.621   1.423   -0.035   0.006  ER   0.308   0.432   0.531   0.556   1.929   0.903   0.026 RF   0.343   0.467   0.553   0.590   1.554   -0.319   0.006  RoleLLM EF   0.294   0.419   0.493   0.628   1.775   1.066   0.001  ER   0.284   0.413   0.511   0.568   2.338   1.224   0.024 RF   0.300   0.419   0.500   0.595   1.813   2.617   0.022 Chat- Haruhi EF   0.303   0.433   0.505   0.644   1.870   0.503   0.001  ER   0.280   0.405   0.500   0.568   2.379   2.400   0.043 RF   0.267   0.403   0.472   0.663   2.109   1.317   0.013 GPT3.5 None EF   0.317   0.448   0.514   0.665   1.823   -0.459   0.020 ER   0.324   0.454   0.552   0.570   1.816   -0.611   0.004 RF   0.328   0.466   0.526   0.697   1.550   -0.778   0.006  RoleLLM EF   0.290   0.425   0.483   0.699   1.983   1.117   0.003 ER   0.301   0.424   0.505   0.603   1.947   2.926   0.009 RF   0.290   0.414   0.484   0.639   1.575   2.306   0.001  Chat- Haruhi EF   0.310   0.426   0.486   0.659   1.710   1.352   0.004 ER   0.225   0.383   0.469   0.648   2.067   3.807   0.001  RF   0.298   0.422   0.492   0.639   1.659   1.900   0.003 GPT4o-mini None EF   0.321   0.436   0.502   0.635   1.364   -0.566   0.006 ER   0.260   0.397   0.535   0.498   2.292   0.067   0.024 RF   0.313   0.435   0.517   0.598   1.658   -0.496   0.004  RoleLLM EF   0.285   0.414   0.475   0.679   1.838   1.790   0.006  ER   0.224   0.362   0.478   0.543   3.179   4.410   0.009 RF   0.262   0.387   0.467   0.610   2.159   4.216   0.011 Chat- Haruhi EF   0.266   0.394   0.476   0.610   1.867   2.032   0.000  ER   0.186   0.330   0.440   0.567   3.629   4.503   0.030 RF   0.238   0.367   0.457   0.589   2.247   2.314   0.010  Table 12: Evaluation results of GPT series models on PELD-multi.   EF   stands for “Emotion First”,   ER   for “Emotion and Respond”, and   RF   for “Respond First”.   Error rate   indicates the proportion of instances where model’s response contains emotions outside predefined range or irrelevant content. 6238

Model   Type   Eomtion Consistency   EDD   RCD   Error rate lower   EC   upper   REC  LLama3-70b None EF   0.309   0.437   0.500   0.670   1.822   -1.265   0.060 ER   0.234   0.375   0.476   0.583   2.936   0.002   0.130 RF   0.293   0.415   0.479   0.656   1.681   -0.413   0.012  RoleLLM EF   0.243   0.402   0.472   0.694   2.399   1.360   0.066 ER   0.239   0.373   0.471   0.578   3.014   3.457   0.229 RF   0.203   0.343   0.428   0.622   2.869   4.948   0.027  Chat- Haruhi EF   0.269   0.410   0.485   0.653   2.010   0.507   0.029  ER   0.240   0.374   0.466   0.593   2.969   3.124   0.258 RF   0.210   0.360   0.437   0.661   2.653   4.974   0.081 LLama3-8b None EF   0.235   0.416   0.507   0.665   2.637   -1.777   0.014  ER   0.274   0.438   0.554   0.586   2.909   -0.440   0.283 RF   0.303   0.436   0.509   0.646   1.845   -0.288   0.014  RoleLLM EF   0.185   0.382   0.461   0.714   3.141   1.615   0.010  ER   0.281   0.440   0.537   0.621   3.153   5.667   0.281 RF   0.224   0.382   0.462   0.664   2.511   4.037   0.017 Chat- Haruhi EF   0.284   0.430   0.523   0.611   1.942   3.322   0.013  ER   0.256   0.418   0.520   0.614   3.309   7.953   0.305 RF   0.248   0.389   0.479   0.610   2.479   7.826   0.014  Table 13: Evaluation results of Llama series models on PELD-multi.  Model   Type   Eomtion Consistency   EDD   RCD   Error rate lower   EC   upper   REC  Doubao- Character None EF   0.227   0.374   0.480   0.581   2.403   -0.009   0.004  ER   0.288   0.423   0.535   0.547   2.420   0.206   0.018 RF   0.275   0.408   0.531   0.520   2.178   -0.772   0.012 RoleLLM EF   0.226   0.381   0.490   0.587   2.422   -0.421   0.001  ER   0.254   0.386   0.503   0.530   2.744   2.488   0.044 RF   0.246   0.384   0.490   0.566   2.187   1.094   0.009 Chat- Haruhi EF   0.257   0.391   0.497   0.558   2.009   0.524   0.000  ER   0.246   0.372   0.501   0.494   2.794   1.469   0.009 RF   0.244   0.381   0.497   0.542   2.090   1.043   0.022 Westlake-7b None EF   0.330   0.457   0.517   0.679   1.314   -0.812   0.148 ER   0.329   0.471   0.545   0.657   2.099   -0.234   0.145  RF   0.312   0.440   0.494   0.703   1.729   -1.507   0.150 RoleLLM EF   0.314   0.434   0.483   0.710   1.357   0.508   0.109  ER   0.313   0.462   0.549   0.631   2.644   0.471   0.139 RF   0.260   0.384   0.452   0.646   2.039   2.102   0.150 Chat- Haruhi EF   0.302   0.419   0.480   0.657   1.447   1.677   0.060  ER   0.320   0.460   0.536   0.648   2.433   1.225   0.118 RF   0.252   0.377   0.459   0.604   2.211   1.099   0.098  Table 14: Evaluation results of role-playing LLMs on PELD-multi.   EF   stands for “Emotion First”,   ER   for “Emotion and Respond”, and   RF   for “Respond First”.   Error rate   indicates the proportion of instances where model’s response contains emotions outside predefined range or irrelevant content. 6239

Figure 15: Emotional transition matrices of six characters for different role-playing methods on GPT-3.5.  Figure 16: A multi-turn dialogue case in PELD-multi. 6240